Philip Short: Welcome to the Mississippi Speed Instruction Podcast. I'm Coach Philip Short, and today we have two outstanding coaches joining us. My guests today are Coach Lauren Stratton and Coach Kat Stratton. Lauren played youth club soccer and went on to play at Mississippi State University. She then spent years coaching girls soccer at Madison Academy, giving her deep experience developing female athletes from the youth through the collegiate-prep level. Coach Kat Stratton is an assistant coach at Mississippi State University for the women's soccer program — she won the SEC Championship in 2024. Kat brings elite-level expertise in female athlete development with a specific focus in speed, agility, quickness, and strength. Lauren and Kat are sisters-in-law, which makes for a great dynamic. Ladies, welcome to the show.
Lauren Stratton: Thanks for having us — this is awesome.
Kat Stratton: Thank you for having us.
Philip Short: I'm excited to dive in today — talk speed and agility, and just give the people what they want to hear. So we'll hop straight in. One thing we see a lot with youth sports: kids are playing soccer, baseball, volleyball, and they're practicing their sport consistently. But my question would be — when do they ever just stop and develop base athleticism? Base speed, strength, change of direction, running technique. When does that happen, and when they don't develop that, what's the cost? I guess we'll start with Lauren.
Lauren Stratton: Yeah. You see a lot more kids nowadays — from when I played 30 years ago, and when Kat even played 25 years ago — specializing in sports, and sports are now more year-round. So when you're getting into a sport, let's say softball, there are a lot of very specific skills that get developed, and you're starting that earlier and earlier, so you're losing some of that general athleticism — those movements that are taught as you jump from different sports, like if you went from basketball to softball to soccer to track. Specifically speaking for girls, you develop a whole arsenal of different athleticism — jumping, landing, cutting — doing those different sports. But now we have girls only focused on one sport so they can get really good at that one sport, and they're losing something you would gain playing something else. With soccer specifically — and I'm a little biased, as you heard in the bio, I coached soccer, played soccer — I think soccer builds the best athletes, because you have bursts of speed, you're going to sprint, but you're also going to jog, so there's a level of endurance being built. You're cutting, you're moving, it's a big field, so you're learning field vision, thinking two to three plays ahead. So I always say soccer builds an all-around athlete that's transferable to any other sport. When kids start playing one sport all year round, they're losing some of those things that are naturally developed by playing a multitude of sports.
Philip Short: Right, that's a good point.
Kat Stratton: Yeah. And first off, I'm no expert when it comes to the speed and agility — I kind of leave those to the people that are really good at it. But I do think just playing multiple sports can make you a better athlete all around. Growing up, we were always playing — whether it was an organized sport or, more or less, usually us out in the backyard. I have two older brothers, thankfully, so that's what I was stuck doing. Just building that base through, honestly, natural play, and being around people that want to play and do all the sports. I know that's kind of missing a little bit in this day and age, but that's one way we built that athleticism. I think we are biased, because soccer is a pretty well-rounded sport. And I get the pleasure of working with an almost individualized sport within the sport — the goalkeepers. So speed and agility is huge for us. I talk about not only the foot-eye coordination with soccer, now you've got the hand-eye that comes into play. If they only stick to one sport, it becomes difficult — you learn things through other sports. Obviously I was getting a football thrown at me when I was younger; my second sport was actually tennis, I loved tennis. So the different attributes of different sports is what helps in all.
Lauren Stratton: And you see Sadiq Charles, who came through MRA — Philip, he was before you, right?
Philip Short: Yeah, he was in '17, so he was a little bit before.
Lauren Stratton: So Sadiq Charles came through, a great lineman. Coach Williams did a great job with him, but his natural footwork was already there — Coach Williams didn't have to work a ton on it, because he grew up playing soccer and was actually a goalie all through soccer, played for MRA. They talk a lot about his natural footwork on the O-line just coming from being a soccer player. And you talk to a ton of people who've played at that higher level — they actually encourage kids to do more sports and not pick one, for that exact reason. When you specialize, you lose a lot of those things you can learn from other sports. But then also, like she said, that natural play — I just don't think... we have so much structure with these kids, they're almost overtrained. Whereas if we'd just let them go play and figure it out on their own — climb a tree, jump out of it. You want to learn how to land correctly? Jump out of a tree and don't break your leg. That's how you learn to land and not tear an ACL.
Philip Short: Right. Most kids don't get a chance to develop those baseline attributes. They play their sport — soccer, football, softball — and they start taking lessons on hitting, which I'm not opposed to, or basketball lessons on shooting, which I'm also not opposed to. But if you don't have the baseline speed and agility, the ability to change direction, good footwork — then you might be a great shooter or a great hitter, but can you play the game within the game? That's the real question. So I love that point you two hit on. Next, I want to address something we hear all the time from parents and athletes — the idea that speed is just something you either have or you don't. You were born fast or you weren't. Based on your playing experience at the highest levels — you playing at the University of Alabama, you at Mississippi State, soccer in the SEC — do you believe speed is something you just have, or that it can be developed?
Kat Stratton: I think there's a mix — I'll say yes and no. I do think some people are just naturally faster, and then there's people that have to work on it. I've seen it even at the highest level — we work on it all the time, so it's a thing that's still done even when you get older. But from the youth level, sometimes those kids are just faster, and it's, how do you catch up? Most of them will. I've seen miles per hour get higher in our stuff, which is nice — but you've got to work on it.
Lauren Stratton: Yeah. And I think yes and no. It is God-given — you see those kids that just come out fast — and then you have those who develop it. I'd also say, as the kid goes through that seven-to-14 range, they need to prepare that there are going to be plateaus, highs and lows, as they're growing. We see it with growth spurts all the time. Usually around nine or 10, boys start to grow, and a kid who is super athletic, super fast, all of a sudden looks like a giraffe, because their legs are two inches longer, their feet are bigger, and their mind hasn't caught up with their body. A parent's gut reaction is, "Oh no, what's wrong?" Nothing's wrong — they're just growing. Let them continue what they've been doing, encourage them, and know it'll get back there. And then for girls, when they hit 12, 13, when hormones hit, their whole body changes. You see that a ton in cross-country girls who are killing it, and all of a sudden their times slow down a little just as their body changes. Some people get really discouraged and almost quit, like, "I guess I didn't have it." No — you've got to keep pushing, keep training, your body will adjust as it grows. Even the kids born naturally fast can't not train, because everybody else will catch up with them.
Philip Short: Very much so, you're right. I'm kind of like y'all — I've got that mixed view. You see it all the time, people are just naturally athletic. But how I like to look at it: you have the abilities God has given you, and training only makes it better. That's not to say if you don't have speed you'll never get it — but I tell the kids I train all the time, this isn't some magic potion, but it 100% will make you better than you were. Training makes you better than you would have been without working on those baseline skills. And oftentimes that allows kids to be more athletic — they see it in their sports, moving faster, getting around the base path in baseball, running on that curve angle, the 40s in football, the change of direction. You'll see your numbers increase when you train. Speed is natural, but if you train it and coach it consistently, you will get better at it.
Lauren Stratton: Yeah, and that's what I'd always tell our girls, because they'd get frustrated or discouraged. One week they'd have a really good time with Coach Adams, our strength guy — he started timing them — and the next week not. And I'm like, hey, we just continue to work at it. In the long run it's consistently better, but you may have the off week. I went through it personally — in eighth grade I had to have knee surgery, just a growth-plate issue, and I lost speed. But I didn't just say, "Well, I'm slow now." I was like, okay, we've got to get back to where we are. It's a gift God's given you, and as you're given gifts, you have to be a good steward of them. When you teach kids that early — "God has given you the gift to play this sport, how are you going to steward it?" — that carries on into life. God has given you a job, how are you going to steward it? God has given you a family. So it goes beyond training. A lot of parents say, "Oh, don't push them too hard, you're doing too much." But you're using it to instill work ethic and learning how to go above and beyond when everybody else may not be. And nowadays, when you go above and beyond, you stand out, because most people are just trying to do the bare minimum.
Philip Short: Yeah, you see it all the time — in the job force, in kids with training. I agree 100%. I want to shift gears. There's a lot of conversation right now about whether female athletes are being trained the right way — or whether we're putting girls through programs really designed for boys. What are the biggest mistakes you see when it comes to developing young female athletes?
Kat Stratton: Yeah, it's a deeper question. I don't know if I see any real mistakes. Obviously I'm at a little bit of a different level, so I see it from a very specialized way — you might have more insight. But it's a weird thing, saying you're training a girl like a boy, or a boy like a girl — I don't really see the two as different. There are things you can do to help. Obviously in our sport, a lot of ACLs — women's soccer, women's sports, that's one of the big hot topics right now. Can you do stuff to strengthen and prevent injury? Yeah. But at the same time, I'm always going to be a proponent of: girls can do what boys can do. The weight might not be moving the same, you may not have as much on a bar, but we have to move like athletes. An athlete is an athlete — boy or girl, an athlete is an athlete.
Lauren Stratton: I would 100% agree. For so long there was a stigma about a girl getting in the weight room — "Why are you training like a boy?" And I'd say the number one thing a girl needs to do is be in the weight room. Kat, you never tore your ACL, right?
Kat Stratton: No, knock on wood, I never did. I'm still kicking around sometimes.
Lauren Stratton: And I never tore my ACL. We played all the way through the highest level for most girls — SEC soccer — without tearing an ACL. A lot of that comes down to strength and weight training. Yes, girls need to focus on some things differently — a girl needs to learn to cut properly, to land with power technique — but for so long we avoided the weight room for girls because we thought it was bulky, or masculine, or what guys who play football do: "You're a soccer player, you just need to run fast and kick a ball." But no — the best thing girls could be doing is getting in a weight room with a trusted strength coach. Now, I'm not saying get in there with just anybody who's going to put 45s on each side and have you bench press — that's not helpful for soccer. But nowadays our strength coaches are so well-informed on what these athletes need. Girls don't need to be afraid of the weight room — they need to recognize it as one of their best friends. Muscle endurance is huge. I'd tell my girls, you can have all the skill in the world, but if you have no endurance, the first thing to go is your skills — striking a ball well, passing the ball. The biggest tell in soccer is fatigue: you want to see a girl who's tired? Watch how she traps a ball. She goes from being able to take a ball out of the air and stop it on her foot, to just hitting her leg hard — because she's tired, her muscles are tired, she's mentally tired.
Philip Short: Yeah, that makes sense.
Lauren Stratton: So have you put those extra reps in the weight room to build that muscle endurance, so that in the overtime, 100th minute of a game versus Arkansas, you have that edge over your opponent? And that's at the highest level, but it's in high school sports too. You see these close teams, and the difference is the last 10 minutes of the game — who can dig deep and have that extra bit. And it's not who spent more time in the batting cages or throwing — it's who put a little extra time in the weight room, who ran one more sprint at practice.
Philip Short: I'd like to hit on that point too. Fatigue is the ultimate equalizer — the neutralizer. With football, anybody can do it for the first quarter, but it's when you get to the third and fourth. And to piggyback on George earlier, I've seen how he's developed MRA — "Hey, we just want to keep it close to the end, because our conditioning, the way we train, will kick in, and we'll be better off by the end of the game than the beginning." So I 100% agree. And how we build a bigger tank is training, like you're saying — spending time in the weight room, building those base speed and agility traits, rather than just hitting the baseball or just taking private soccer lessons on how to kick.
Lauren Stratton: For sure. And I'll say, for kids — a lot of them, I know Kat did, because again, I'm married to her older brother — when I came into her life, I think she was 12, 13, she did a lot of work on her own. She was going to tennis practice, soccer practice, but when she got home, even as a goalkeeper, her dad was like, "Go run." "Lauren, you go run a mile with her." I started knowing if I went home with Matt at college, we were going to do some kind of training. He knew, as a coach himself, that just doing what you're doing at practice is not enough by any means. And that's where kids struggle — "But I went to this practice, I don't miss practice." Okay, that's great, but your coach can only do so much with you at practice, and a lot of times they're working on team skills. Are they working on your endurance? Every kid can get out and run a lap around the neighborhood, do some things in their backyard on their own to give themselves that edge.
Kat Stratton: Yeah, just doing stuff on your own. I'm not saying wear yourself out, I'm not saying go five days a week. But if you're dependent on your team practice to get you better, and you're not doing anything on your own... And again, I'm not pushing for private lessons — you don't have to have a personal coach to tell you to run a lap around your neighborhood to build endurance.
Kat Stratton: And I think that's where the mentality comes into place — kind of like with the fatigue, the first thing to go, and you can see it, is the mental mistakes and the attention to detail. I wish I had a stat, but I know there has to be one — in the last couple minutes of the game, especially in soccer, that's usually when a lot of goals are scored. Do you have that extra sprint in you, that extra little umph? I always look at everything defensively — that's where my brain goes — do you have that extra in you to make a sliding tackle in the box, an extra five-yard sprint, in the 89th minute, to save a goal? Can you have that mentality and that grit? I actually talked about it with Matt — her husband, my brother — last night, about how that's the biggest separator: the way you train off the field, and then you reap the rewards on the field. It comes down to mentality. If I know I've done it so many times, and I can push through fatigue, push through pain, and I have the technique behind it with the speed and agility — you put everything together and it comes into one moment. It may be a split second, but you've made a decision and you aren't even thinking about it. You just do it. Muscle memory.
Lauren Stratton: And with training and pushing yourself to that level at that age — remember, we're thinking seven to 14, seven to 18 — when you push yourself beyond limits, you start learning your body is way more capable than what your mind says. My husband jokingly says, "Hey, you're 38, your body can't do what your mind says it does." So there is a time where it flips. But for kids, they allow their mind to stop them. When you're out there training and pushing yourself, you start to realize, no, I can do more than what my mind tells me, my body can actually go farther. And like she said, it becomes muscle memory. So in a game — whether it's football, you're a DB tracking a receiver — your body can make that extra play. Tracking somebody back in soccer, you've got to make that play before they get the shot off — you can make that. Looking to steal a base in softball or baseball — you can do that. There's so much more your body is capable of than the mind sometimes allows. Your mind wants to tell you, "No, you hurt, stop." When you train and push beyond that, and you stand up at the end of it like, "Yeah, I actually am okay" — you're pushing past that breaking point.
Philip Short: No, I agree with that 100%. You've hit on some great pieces. And I guess we naturally transition to the mental side — especially for young girls. What role does confidence play, and what do you tell a kid who doesn't believe — "I'm not fast enough, I'm not strong enough, I'm just not good enough"? Specifically ages seven to 14, what role does confidence play in performance?
Kat Stratton: I actually think the biggest thing — I know we've been talking about all the specifics of training, but at the end of the day, it's all fun. It's all sport. You're just going out to have fun. So if you can't make things fun... I think that's one of the biggest things in this age group — how do you make it just games? You're just playing. Go have fun with your friends. Things will naturally happen, but the more fun you can make it, the better. I know we've been getting into very technical details, but at the end of the day it just needs to be fun, especially for the seven-to-14 group. Think about how much of your life is stuff just fun — it's a very short amount of time, because when you turn into that 15-, 16-year-old, whether you're competing at the high school level, for your club, or wanting to play in college, it turns from being fun to a little bit more pressure. And that's okay, that needs to happen. But from seven to 14, man, you need to have fun. Honestly, for all of us sitting here — we've all been high-level — think back to the best game you had. You probably were having your most fun.
Lauren Stratton: Yep, you're just having fun.
Kat Stratton: You're smiling, you're laughing, but you're crushing it, because you're so relaxed. So that's what you need to find for these kids at that age — just having fun.
Lauren Stratton: But for girls, confidence is a huge thing. They're all going to take hits and dips in it. There's a fine line — and this is for girls and boys, but specifically girls, from my coaching: I could get on a girl and chew her up and down, tell her everything she was doing wrong, that she was out of position, her girl was beating her all day — and she'd look at me and say, "I'm going to prove you wrong," and turn a switch. If I got on to her, that would get her going. But then, unfortunately, some go through a stretch — a game, a couple weeks, an entire season — of real bad negative self-talk. So as the coach, your job is to break that cycle and be the encourager: remind them they do have the ability, that they have the skill set to be the player they're capable of being. It's a balance of finding, what kind of child do you have? If you're a parent, what kind of kid do you have — one you can stay on their back and they'll push harder, or one you've got to be more of a personal cheerleader for? You've got to figure out what makes each kid tick. But for girls, almost all of them go through a season where their confidence is low, their security is low — getting them back to that point is key.
Philip Short: And just hitting on what Kat was saying about making it fun — I'll never forget, I came out and watched Mike training the kids in the summer, and I was so impressed at how his drills were all fun. They didn't seem like work — playing tag, running on a curve sprint, sometimes doing somersaults — where you look at it and go, "Wow, that's fun," but the entire time they don't know they're working on landing, on change of direction at a high pace. Because in a kid's mind, if we're playing tag, I don't want to get tagged. It's not a drill where you're static, waiting on the coach to blow a whistle to change direction — it's, if you tag me, I'm going to go tag you. So getting them in that intentional mindset while making it fun, especially for ages seven to 14, is key. You get the most out of them when you make it fun.
Kat Stratton: When you make it fun — games. How do you get it out of them? Games. Honestly, our game, every sport — that's how you get the best out of it. The best way to get better at it is to play the game. So how do you make small little games? A game within a game.
Lauren Stratton: A game within a game. And that's my favorite thing to do — how do you keep kids entertained? You give them games, make it a competition, say, "This is for this little prize," and they're like, "Oh yeah, now I'm ready to go."
Philip Short: And even from a coaching feedback standpoint, you get to give them great feedback on how they perform under pressure, when something's at stake. Because like you said, we all played college sports — and you have, for instance, the Lauren in practice, and then the game-time Lauren. It's a switch people naturally flip. And I'm a big proponent of: can I make practice like the game? Whether it's personal preparation, coaching a quarterback, or training a kid — how can I make this drill like the game, or even harder? I always wanted to make it harder than the game, because then the game feels easier, and you're much more comfortable and confident.
Lauren Stratton: That was the thing with basketball — I played basketball, her other sport was tennis, mine in high school was basketball. I remember in practice there was a sophomore I hated guarding me, because she was so intense. She never stepped foot on the court when we played a game, but she guarded and played defense so hard during practices — I hated it. But it made the game so easy, because I was like, man, she's nothing like Madison; Madison's all up in my face, I can't get around her. Even as a 17-, 18-year-old, when I took that into coaching, I was like, I've got to make my practices harder. The game within the game — can I make it harder than the actual game? With soccer, we'll take possession — where you're just passing around trying to keep the ball — and make it a really tight space. So you've got 3v2 in a really small space, it's hard, the touches are sloppy. But then you open it up to an actual full-field game, and they're like, "Wow, I have so much space, so much time." We went from a compact, tight, high-pressure situation, then opened it up, and you're like, "That's what the game's like. If you'd take a deep breath, you have tons of time."
Philip Short: Yes. And I feel like at Mississippi Speed Instruction, that's one thing we do a great job of — even with the camps, making it fun, creating obstacle courses. You've been there.
Lauren Stratton: I've been there. What was that — '93? I see it there on the table, '93. I was a camp participant from, I think, '99 to 2002.
Philip Short: That's actually awesome. Isn't that crazy?
Lauren Stratton: We'll get our girls back through it too. Like I said, we really want to make it fun on the kids. We have obstacle courses — it's training, but at the end of the day, they don't even know. And you see the performance after the training — their level of play increases. You can tell the ones who have trained versus the ones who don't.
Philip Short: And so, like you said, having fun — that's a really good point. Especially for ages seven to 14: how can we make training as fun as possible and not feel like a job? Because they'll burn out if it feels like a job. So at MSI we really try to do a great job of making it fun — as many colored cones as possible, different obstacle courses — so they're getting efficient work, but in their minds it's just fun.
Kat Stratton: It sounds like y'all are passionate about it. You're bringing the passion to them, and now you're sharing it, showing them how much fun it can be.
Philip Short: Oh yeah. And I want to piggyback off your playing careers — you playing at Alabama, you at Mississippi State. What role did speed development and strength and conditioning play in your own personal successes as an athlete? Was there ever a moment where you felt yourself become a different athlete because of training?
Kat Stratton: I actually have a decent answer for this one. Right before I went off to college, speed work was the biggest thing I did. I'm six foot, so I'm a taller girl, and being more explosive, having that little quick step I needed — I worked with a personal coach in Tupelo. That was legit all I did before I left. Yes, I did the packet we got sent, the strength work, but the extra work I did was the speed work, and I think that helped me. We did the timed runs — I think it was the 20, 40, 60, and maybe even all the way to 100. Let's just say, once I got to the further distances — remember, I'm a goalkeeper, so me and running very short distances, very good; longer, we don't like those. But within that first 20 yards, as a freshman coming in, I was actually number four within that group. So seeing how much work I put in over the summer, then coming in and showing it on the numbers, I was like, okay, we're getting somewhere. Now, once you got a little further, that was a different story — I went down the list a little bit. But for what I need to be good at, that short burst, that's where I landed. Really seeing it come through after working on it — that was awesome. Very rewarding.
Lauren Stratton: I did some of the training with MSI. At that time it was called Speed, Agility, and Quickness, SAQ, when Mike first started it. I got in, I think I was nine, 10, 11 — it was three summers, and it was by far my favorite summer camp. I was going to UAB for soccer camp, going to different camps, but that camp every year, I told my mom to make sure to sign me up, because it was fun. Honestly, I didn't really think I was getting better at the time, but it was just fun. Then I had the knee surgery in eighth grade, and my parents reached out to Boris Fischer, who worked some of the camps at SAQ, and I started doing lessons just to work on my speed, getting my strength back. I was real nervous to cut after surgery, and I worked with him for two summers. What I noticed most was my explosiveness. I think we downplay explosiveness a ton — that first step, that's the difference. I'm not necessarily outright 120-yards fast, I'm not going to be a 100-meter track star, but in basketball and even soccer, I was going to beat you on the first step. Anything cutting — if we did a 5-10-5 drill, I was one of the first to finish, just because of the ability to sink my hips and drop, because I'd been trained properly in it. That's where I started noticing, probably going into ninth, 10th grade — that first step was explosive, and from there it propelled me on.
Lauren Stratton: And I think a lot of people need to hear this, from my experience and from working with girls at the higher level: the majority of your summer is not with a ball. I'd go out with three girls — one played at the University of Miami, one at UNC Charlotte, one at Mississippi State — and all four of us would train five days a week. We'd be out there for an hour, and 50 minutes was put toward running, speed, star drills, cone drills, shuffles. Maybe the last 15 minutes we'd pass the ball. That was four, five days a week the whole summer to prepare for our season — not having a ball at our feet, to get ready for the sport. We had that down. You've got to build that basic athleticism, that speed work, because all of it flows to every sport. And going back to specializing — no kid knows what they're going to do when they're seven years old. So training your child to be a really good volleyball player at eight — what if by the time they're 14, they want to try something else? As a parent, your goal is to make an athlete who loves to compete and has fun. By the time they're 14, if you've got an athlete that loves to compete and wants to have fun, you've done a great job of raising a kid in sports, because now you've set them up for whatever path. And you have no idea how God is going to bless you in regards to growth. We jokingly say — her brother, my husband — she's six foot, sorry Matt; her brother is 6'3", 6'4"; your dad's 6'2", your mom's 5'11", she's probably 5'9". And my husband Matt is 5'10" on a good day — he just didn't hit his growth spurt until later. So if you've put all your eggs in the basket to be a great football player and your kid never gets past 5'5"... there's so much you've got to wait for hormones to kick in. So just creating an athlete that can move — that's going to set you up for whatever.
Philip Short: Especially nowadays. You see it in the combine numbers — kids are getting increasingly more athletic. The 40-yard dash at the combine; you can turn on a game and watch the speed versus 20 years ago. Kids are getting faster. So I'm a big proponent of developing those baseline skills, because you never know. One thing I do know: you're going to need speed in baseball, basketball, football, soccer, track. Speed is the difference. And that first step — that's one thing here at MSI we work a ton: broad jumps, medicine ball tosses, jumps, explosion. And with the kids, it's how can I get in their brains about intent — when you run, your feet aren't just moving, you're pushing off the ground, putting force into the ground. At that age, when that clicks, they're like, "Oh, when I push off the ground harder, I'm faster." So developing intent — "I'm not just doing this to be doing it." Pumping your arms is another big one — your arms don't just naturally flow, you have to be intentional about pumping them, your knee drive, all of it. We're building baseline speed and agility, but understanding there's intent behind it, and when I'm intentional, I'm faster.
Lauren Stratton: It's exciting too when you start that arm motion. We giggle — I laugh now at why kids run the way they do. We started watching cartoons; we have kids that are nine and six, and Sonic, Mario — they all run with their arms straight back, like this. So you're like, wow, you actually need to teach them how to properly run, because what they're watching is, if you put your arms back, you'll run fast. I never thought I'd actually have to tell someone to pump their arms — but it's cool when you see it.
Kat Stratton: And I think, too — a lot of times there's a difference between quick and speed. Quickness and speed. The explosiveness we're talking about: you can be quick but not the fastest, or fast but not the quickest, because it takes you too long to get there. Whenever you can combine them both, that's where the true athlete comes out. So, talking intentional — everything you do intentional, every detail matters, because it pushes you a little bit further.
Philip Short: Yes, 100%. The earlier they get that at a younger age... that's something I didn't learn until I was a freshman in college. I played quarterback, so until I started working with a trainer on the small details and being intentional — when I go out to throw, I'm not just throwing to have fun on a Saturday, I'm working on my footwork, the spots I need, my accuracy, my deep ball. Once my trainer instilled in me, "You have to be intentional about the small details" — if we can teach that to seven- and eight-year-olds, sure, they might hear you and then go do their own thing, but the more you tell them consistently, eventually it clicks and puts you so much ahead.
Lauren Stratton: And each little thing — I remember doing those 5-10-5s. Mike had us doing those and I was like, "This is ridiculous, what is this? I'm never going to do this." But I learned it there, got to State, and some of our teammates were hearing for the first time: drop your hips, don't shuffle your feet up to the line, plant and then turn. We call them "school bus turns" — don't turn like that, you drop in. And watching our girls, you're like, whoa, y'all didn't know that? Then watching their times — unfortunately they were catching up to me, because my little trick wasn't working anymore, they all had it now — and they're like, "Yeah, that's easier." So, putting this in front of kids earlier, having it as a base of building the athlete, as opposed to coming in on the backside of all the skills they've learned — I think that makes it so much better for them.
Philip Short: Yes. All right, last one — we've had an amazing discussion. If a parent watching this right now walks away and does one thing differently for their daughter, what would you want that to be? We've talked change of direction, developing speed and agility before you specialize, intent, the mental aspect. So just one thing — what would be the biggest takeaway for a parent watching?
Kat Stratton: For me, it would go back to the confidence side of things — and really just allowing coaches like yourselves to be the ones to instill all the things we've been talking about, and you just be the ones encouraging them along the way. Because a lot of times, I know as females, we just want to please authority — we want to make our coaches happy, make our parents happy — and all those things can get a little crazy up there. So, allow the professionals to do their jobs, and you just come along and say, "Good job. What did you learn today?" Just continue to support. That would be my thing.
Philip Short: Amen, that was so good. Parents, let the coaches do their job.
Lauren Stratton: And I'd say, just from personal — again, I am a parent — our big thing is effort and attitude. We tell both of our kids every time they get out of the car for a sport: "Hey, what's your effort? What's your attitude?" Those are the only things that matter, not necessarily the outcomes. But specifically in regards to training — letting your daughter learn she can do hard things. You're going to build confidence when your daughter realizes she can do something hard. There's no better feeling than picking yourself off the ground from a really hard workout that, when the coach told you what it was about to be, you thought, "I don't think I can do that," and then at the end of it, you did it. That's where confidence grows, because you just proved to yourself you can do hard things. So start instilling that now — making them do hard things. They're tired? "Hey, let's get a little better today, let's go for a jog. Let's do a couple of hill sprints — not a lot, let's just go. There's a hill on the back side of the neighborhood, I'll go with you, let's do it together." You're going to get some groaning pushback, but nine times out of 10, when they get done, they're going to be proud they did it — whether they say it or not, it grew inside of them a little. So that's what I'd say: just go ahead and get that in.
Philip Short: I agree. Well, Lauren, Kat, this was incredible — thank you so much for being here. Parents, I hope you got as much out of this as I did. If you want your daughter to obtain some of these skills and some confidence at an early age, we're running our summer camps. Our MSI girls camp runs June 23rd through the 25th at Madison Ridgeland Academy here in Madison, Mississippi, from 4:00 to 5:45. And our boys camp is June 9th through the 11th, same location, same time. Ages 7 to 14. Everything you need is on the website, MississippiSpeed.com — you can register your athlete. We have a max of 50 and they're filling up very quickly, so pull up the link and get registered, so they can develop those baseline speed and agility mechanics, and you can develop a better athlete at an early age. I'm Coach Philip Short. This is the Mississippi Speed Instruction Podcast.
