Philip Short: Welcome to the Mississippi Speed Instruction Podcast. I'm Coach Philip Short, and today we've got a Madison, Mississippi kid who took his speed all the way to the NFL. My guest today is none other than Stone Blanton — a linebacker out of Madison, Mississippi who played at Madison Ridgeland Academy, where he was a four-star recruit, an Under Armour All-American, and a Butkus Award semifinalist. Stone played two seasons at South Carolina before transferring home to Mississippi State, where his 2024 season was one for the record books: 125 tackles, second in the SEC, ninth in the nation, and all-SEC honors — very impressive. In May of 2025, Stone signed with the San Francisco 49ers as an undrafted free agent, had a strong preseason with four turnovers, and has most recently earned a minicamp trial with the Tennessee Titans. He's a Mississippi-trained athlete who climbed from MRA to the NFL, and today he's here to talk with the next generation that's possibly chasing that same path. Stone, welcome back home, man. Good to have you here.
Stone Blanton: Hey, appreciate it, Phil. My OG quarterback, man — back in the day.
Philip Short: Good times, man. So we're just gonna unfold the potato a little bit today — just kind of go over your life. We're really grateful to have you. First off, take us back to growing up in Madison. What does Mississippi football mean to you, and how early did you know that this was gonna be the path?
Stone Blanton: Yeah. Mississippi's got some great talent. They've always had great players in Mississippi. Keeping the athletes in Mississippi has been a big thing that the in-state schools have tried to do. But I think we've always had great competition growing up. Back when we played together, we had a lot of guys that went and played at the next level. Football — I really didn't know football was gonna be for me until later on. I was a baseball player kind of growing up, doing a lot of travel ball, doing golf, track, swimming. So I did a lot of sports before I even thought football was my main sport. I didn't start football until I got to MRA in sixth grade, and just kind of started working out, training, and then one thing led to another.
Philip Short: Yeah, that's awesome. I know you mentioned baseball — you played both football and baseball at MRA. What did being a two-sport athlete teach you that maybe a kid who's playing one sport, a single-sport kid, what do those kids miss out on?
Stone Blanton: Yeah, I think in today's world of sports, a lot of parents are pushing their kids to specialize a little early — doing those high-end classes and getting specialized training for pitching or hitting or a certain position in football. But the biggest thing for me growing up was playing all those sports. My parents were putting me in sports all day every day when I was back in Meridian. I was waking up at 7 a.m., I was doing a swim lesson, I was playing golf all day, then I had a baseball practice in the afternoon. Just always constantly moving. I have my brothers I would go in the backyard and play with — we'd play any kind of sport you could pick up together. I've got three older brothers, so we were always being competitive in one way or the other. That's one of the most important things you can do growing up: just do it all while you have the energy and the time. Take your kids to everything they can get their hands on and let them get after it.
Philip Short: I agree with you, man. I feel like all sports teach different aspects of movement — basketball is a lot of change of direction, track is straight-line speed, baseball is some change of direction plus vertical sprinting and running on the curve, and then also the mental aspects, and they're all different. So I'm definitely a big proponent — like you said, playing more than one sport growing up just teaches you so much. You get that competitive factor, the mental battle of, say for instance, a pitcher. I was a pitcher at one point — it's a real mental battle out there, which coexists with quarterback as well. You're kind of on your own world, kind of on that island out there, and things start to get tough.
Stone Blanton: All the different sports give you such an edge, because like you said, they're all different kinds of mental states that you're in. Like golf — every shot matters, so you're in a different headspace where you've got to wipe the past shot to go to the next one. Baseball — if you strike out, like, it's a losing man's game. If you go three for 10, you're gonna be in the Hall of Fame as an MLB player. So it's literally a losing man's game on the mental side and battling with that. Then football — how aggressive can you be, but stay under control? I think they all help you develop into one strong mindset, just a stronger person playing sports. The discipline and stuff, but the mindset is key.
Philip Short: So true, man. I want to take it back to your MRA days — 285 tackles, 47 tackles for loss, four-star recruit. What habits or training did you build back then that you still rely on today?
Stone Blanton: Yeah, and I think you can probably vouch for some of this, because me and Philip were teammates back in the day. MRA — he was a heck of a quarterback, carried us through, got us that state championship run.
Philip Short: Good times.
Stone Blanton: But the discipline we got at MRA — in football and just learning the game — I think they did a great job of teaching us the game of football, and I was able to carry that with me into college and then the pros. Coach Davis, Coach Y, they always taught us the game of football. Sometimes you get out there and you don't get coached as much on the game of football — it's just more about, "Can you get here? Can you line up here?" But they were able to connect the, you know, "How does the D-line affect the linebackers? How does the linebackers affect these corners that are kind of on an island?" That was a lot of what they instilled into us — just teaching us the game. That really helped me be ahead of some people when I got to the SEC.
Philip Short: I'd have to agree with you. Being from MRA and seeing the different workouts we used to do — Coach Adams, man, that guy's a genius. Even with me leaving there and playing at the Division I level, you see a lot of things translate over: the drills, the early morning workouts. We're getting started during the week at 6:40 in high school. Just to piggyback on what you said about those discipline habits of starting early — and then we got recovery, Game Ready, a lot of different recovery stuff. That strict schedule we were on at MRA — I would say it prepared you for that next level.
Stone Blanton: Yeah. And back to Coach Adams — that summer when he came in, I think we were his first year. The summer workouts that he had us going through — I don't know if I've ever been through a harder offseason of training. The stuff he was making us do day one was 300-yard shuttles. I think that was the first workout he introduced us to. Yeah — 25 and back. Oh my goodness. I never did a 25-and-back shuttle after I left MRA. He would kill us. And then another thing — my freshman year going to South Carolina, I was working out with Coach Adams during that month of May, where you kind of build up. Because freshmen usually get there around May 25th. And man, I was gassed at my first workouts. South Carolina did some really crazy stuff — military-style training. Heavy bags, tires you're flipping. You remember we had some of that too. That was probably your freshman year.
Philip Short: Yeah, that was my freshman year. 10 by 10. I was like, this is really what I want to do.
Stone Blanton: But the following year I got home — I was home for May, that was kind of our one break we had. I got with Coach Adams, and I think Noah came (your brother). And then we had like a group of eight — Davis, Hayes Buckner, all the guys playing at the next level that played with me in high school. We had this group going. We trained together for the month of May with Coach Adams. He was killing us. But when I got back to South Carolina, it was a breeze. Like, the first week compared to the year before, it was the same workouts. I was just in so much better shape because of the stuff he gave us, and I was able to be so much better prepared going into the next summer — completely changed my body, kind of like a recomp and all that stuff.
Philip Short: That's good stuff. We talked about high school, playing football at MRA. What would you say is the biggest gap between high school football and your first SEC snap as a true freshman?
Stone Blanton: Yeah, the pressure. Godly. South Carolina can hold like 80,000 or so, give or take, on a Saturday. They had the cool light show. The fans were going nuts. The fan base is huge. They're very heavy on social media, so the build-up to the games and stuff was huge. They were doing all kinds of stuff, posting and getting super excited. We had Spencer Rattler coming in at quarterback, which created a whole bunch of hype. I was super excited. The first snap going out there — even just sitting on the sidelines — it was the fourth quarter. We played Georgia State. I didn't think I was going to get to play. I was on special teams, but I wasn't really supposed to go on defense. Coach White was our DC at South Carolina. He said he hadn't had a freshman play in the first game in his career. So I was like, I'm probably not playing. And then sure enough, we started beating them in the fourth quarter. He sent me in there. They had the Sandstorm going, the light show was going for the fourth quarter — that's a lecture. And then we got a sack on my first play. I just remember the noise was so loud, it was deafening. I couldn't hear anything. I was like, this is different. You're enclosed in this big arena. I think it's Tom Brady that says, "the man in the arena." Like, it really is that. You're in an arena and everybody's looking at you, and you've gotta be able to handle the pressure — especially being the first game, you don't know what to expect.
Philip Short: It's unreal. I'd have to agree with you, man. That's the difference from high school to college — the mental side. You go from performing in front of a few thousand to tens of thousands. The pressure that builds up — it's not just your high school, you're performing for an organization in the NCAA. So I'd have to agree, that's the biggest step from high school to college: the mental side. And since we're on the mental side, I guess I'd have to ask — how important is that mental side, film study, being instinctive, your football IQ versus the physical tools? Where did you put most of your time, mental or physical?
Stone Blanton: Yeah. I think I made my money on the mental side. Because I'm not the most physically gifted individual, especially for linebacker. I wasn't the fastest guy, I didn't have the longest arms. My physical attributes weren't that great — didn't stand out on paper. But my mental side, being able to slow the game down tremendously, was kind of how I made my money. My freshman year coming in, I'd already had good training with Coach Davis, Coach White, and the crew at MRA, so I was already a little bit ahead there. And then Coach Trey Money — he's now the linebackers coach at South Carolina, but he was the GA when I first got there. I give a lot of credit to him. He changed the game for me, just teaching me the game at such a detailed level. I was probably wearing him out, but I was staying in the building during the summer. A lot of people may not know — in summer, you have a lot of free time. You have workouts in the morning and then you're pretty much done, especially for the month of June. You don't have a whole lot of football responsibility. It's mainly workouts and stuff like that, and there are rules around that to protect players. But there's nobody stopping you from getting extra work. I was going with Coach Trey Money every day, just trying to learn the defense. I was so hungry to learn, because I knew that was going to be my only way on the field. When I first got there, I'm looking around like, these dudes are different. They're huge, they're fast, they're good — they can do it all. And I'm sitting here like, how am I going to be different, how am I going to stand out? Film was the biggest thing for me — being able to digest it, then go out on the field and be able to communicate. As a mike linebacker, you've gotta be able to communicate to everybody — you're in the center of the defense. My freshman year I actually slept in the facility for two weeks straight during fall camp. I didn't leave, because we get there at 7:15 and we got done around 10 p.m. I was like, I want to get that extra work in, but I've got curfew, I've got to meet — so I just started telling people, "I'm just gonna sleep in the facility." I brought an air mattress. I had like one pair of clothes besides my PJs. All I knew was just sleep clothes, toothbrush. I literally just stayed there the whole time, getting extra reps mentally. I think that really ultimately helped me get where I am today.
Philip Short: I agree, man, 100%. That mental side ties together with the physical side. Especially when you're playing — you can only imagine playing in a game that fast with that amount of athletes, you have to have that edge. I love how you said your edge was the film side, the mental side. Understanding — "Hey, this is the play they like to run a lot, they like to run counter, they like to run power, we can expect a lot of power this week, outside zone this week."
Stone Blanton: Like, the tackles, they'll keep their hand up — if it's pass, they'll put their hand down. If it's run — that was a real key in a game. Figuring that out. You start to see people's eyes shift. The tight end, if he's going back, you know, his eyes are gonna be kind of looking around like that. Just being able to see those cues. And then I think the instincts come from — I don't think I had just a crazy God-given ability to know football. I think it was just that I took so many mental repetitions, that over time it conditioned me where, if I saw the same formation or the same motion, my body knew what was coming, because I just got in a flow state. You'll understand the flow state — that's when you really start to play good ball, when you don't even really realize what you're doing. You're just playing and reacting. That's kind of the best feeling in the world, when you get in that flow state of football. Or any sport really.
Philip Short: No, 100%. I definitely agree with that. So we talked about MRA, we talked about the mental side of football. After two years at South Carolina, you came home to Mississippi State. What was the decision like, both football-wise and personally?
Stone Blanton: Yeah, that was probably the hardest decision I made in my athletic career, just because of how much I loved the players at South Carolina, the staff at South Carolina. I truly love that program. So leaving it was one of the hardest things ever. It was December — I was home, and it just felt really nice to be close to my family, because I hadn't been able to see my family consistently. You're in South Carolina the whole time. The whole first year I didn't even go home — we had a bowl game my first year, and that takes up your whole December. You got Christmas off, which was a day, and then you fly out on Christmas Day. Then you start back for the new season in January, like January 6th for South Carolina. So there was no break — you just had to go straight through until May. The decision came to: I wanted to be close to family. I grew up a Mississippi State fan; I committed to them in baseball way back in ninth grade. So I always had those roots of, "I want to play for Mississippi State." It led to: is this really what I want to do? Is this the best thing for me? It was really hard conversations I had to have. I still have a great relationship with the coaches and the guys I played with at South Carolina. But I ended up loving my time at Mississippi State too. It was a lot of fun, getting to know people and being able to live in Mississippi was probably where I was going to be. I knew I wanted to come home to Mississippi, so having the ability to say "Hey, I played for Mississippi State" — I felt like it would hit a little better than saying I played somewhere else, especially since you knew you wanted this to be your final destination in Mississippi.
Philip Short: Smart of you. You mentioned Mississippi State. All right — your 2024 season at Mississippi State was a breakout year: 125 tackles, second in the SEC, ninth in the nation, all-SEC honors. What clicked that year?
Stone Blanton: A lot of the stuff we've been talking about — the mental side and really slowing the game down. When you first get into it, the game moves so fast. My junior year, it really slowed down for me. Coach Hutzler was fantastic, Coach Levy was fantastic about making me feel really comfortable and giving me that confidence. Coach Hutzler and I would get into it, and I knew we could do that because we had such a good relationship. He could chew me out and it would just kind of fire me up. He could get that fire out of me to do better. I really appreciate what he did for my career. I was kind of two different personalities. South Carolina was more reserved, quiet — really let my work speak for it. When I got to Mississippi State, I was much more vocal. Still had the work ethic instilled. One of the biggest things you can do — if you're a younger guy going into your first year of college, you can really make a name for yourself or lose your name in that first offseason. That's where a lot of the hierarchy gets placed. If you can't finish the workouts, they're not going to depend on you when the season comes. So you can make huge jumps in people's minds about who you are as a person and a player, just on your mental toughness of getting through workouts and being dominant and having fun with it. That was my biggest thing — I always turned the workouts into fun times. People would be dying, throwing up, tapping out, and I would just be yelling, singing a mildly sour song or something, just screaming, being kind of crazy.
Philip Short: I think that's super important — just to hit on that point of how you made it fun. Especially at the Division I level, it becomes so much of a job that we forget, hey, we're just kids out here having fun. That's one thing I tried to do as well. Football is fun. The day I stop having fun with it, I'm done with it. It's all about having fun. Football, sports in general, is all about having fun. When you put pressure on yourself, it becomes more restrained than it is fun.
Stone Blanton: And it's crippling too — you don't play your best when you're not having fun. And coaches are a big thing. That's why I did a camp with y'all at MSI — how y'all are able to operate, and y'all made it so fun. Looking back at when I was at age — that was a big thing for me. Can coaches make this fun for me? Because if not, then I go into kind of that shelled personality where I don't let loose, and then I play a lot worse. Watching what you're doing with the kids really fired me up, because that's the stuff I would want when I was their age. Coaches making it fun, having a good time with me, building that relationship — that's what makes kids love sports.
Philip Short: No doubt. Even at the coaches' level — talking about different coaches, the coaches who make it fun for the kids are normally the most successful coaches.
Stone Blanton: Absolutely. Because they get the most out of their players.
Philip Short: Right. The players don't feel as much pressure to perform, because it's just fun, so you definitely get 100% of them. I heard Pete Carroll talking about that a while back — how he tries to make every environment fun, even at the NFL level. Not always talking about football. "How was your day? How was the weekend?" Just creating that relaxed environment for the kid is huge if you want to get the best out of them.
Stone Blanton: And I think once you have that relationship — the player knows that you care about them, because if you're making it fun, that obviously means you care. You can't really have a whole lot of fun if you don't care about somebody. So building that relationship with your players, with the people you're training, is huge — because then if you do need to get on them about not doing what they need to do, it's coming from a level of, "This guy respects me. He wants the best for me." So it builds that communication. If you don't have that, you're always just drilling people, putting the most pressure on people — you won't get a good reaction from your players.
Philip Short: That's true. Even in parenting — I've never been a parent, but you can just imagine. It's just like coaching. Letting the kid know you care about them — not just spending money on them, but spending time with them. When it comes to discipline, they'll be way more receptive to listen, because they understand, "Wait, he cares about me. She cares about me, more than just what I can produce." That's what makes a great coach, what makes a coach get the best out of their players, and what makes that relationship work. Moving along — looking at your game stats, the most tackles you had in a game was 18, against Missouri, which is nuts. Walk us through what a day like that feels like from inside the SEC defense.
Stone Blanton: Super, super sore after the day after. But they ended up running the ball a lot in that game, and so you kind of get into that flow state of making plays. The crazy thing is, I actually had a torn turf toe in that game. I tore my turf toe in the Tennessee game right before the half. I kind of thought I'd gotten stepped on — felt like somebody stepped on my toe — and then I couldn't put pressure on it. I was like, oh, that's not good. So in the locker room for halftime, they're like, "We'll check it out tomorrow, see how it looks." And they put this big ol' injection into it to numb my toe to the top of my ankle. So I couldn't feel — like I was playing with a dead leg. Every game after that I had to do the same injection, because I couldn't walk on my toe without the numbing medicine. So I had that numbing medicine in that game. It was the weirdest thing, because it felt like my right foot was just numb. I couldn't feel it. But I was able to — I watched a lot of film for that game, knew a lot of the runs they were going to do, and was able to put myself in position to make some plays. But ultimately, we didn't win. So it doesn't feel that great looking back on it. I wish we could have pulled through and won.
Philip Short: Nevertheless, it was a great individual performance. I remember watching that game — like you said, you kind of knew where the flow of the offense was, kind of where they were going. You had some tendencies you were looking at, because you were playing faster. So you finished off your Mississippi State career, and in May 2025 you signed with the San Francisco 49ers as an undrafted free agent. What was that day like? Obviously, going undrafted is a different road than being drafted. What was your mindset walking into camp?
Stone Blanton: Yeah. So I'll take you back to draft day. We were sitting there watching. I didn't think I was going to get drafted. I really didn't think I was going to get signed, honestly, because I had that turf toe surgery in December and had to get ready for pro day by — I remember, you were working the camp in the boot.
Philip Short: Yeah, I remember.
Stone Blanton: I didn't think I really had a chance, because I was banged up and whatever. And then we're sitting there during the draft, just watching it, having a good time, and you know, we got some calls in the middle of the draft asking if I wanted to get signed as a UDFA. A lot of people probably don't know what that is — they'll call you in like the fourth round and be like, "Hey, we want to sign you as a UDFA." And you're like, "What? We've got three rounds left, what do we do?" I had three people calling me for UDFA. I was like, maybe one of them was going to draft me, so I didn't take the UDFA in the draft. We waited. Obviously didn't get drafted. And I was sitting there — I almost made a huge mistake. The crazy thing is, we had been sitting there for like three or four minutes after the last pick had been made, and Mr. Rob, he's a pastor and my father-in-law — we got up in a big circle, we all held hands. As soon as we held hands and he was about to pray, I got a call from the 49ers. It was one of the craziest things.
Philip Short: That's a God story. I did not know that, man.
Stone Blanton: Yeah, it was unreal. So I got a call, and they're like, "Hey, we want to sign you. I want to get you up here." And I was supposed to get married — I did get married, May 9th. There are two times mini-camps happen — one is the first weekend in May, and then the second weekend in May. I was praying that the 49ers were going to be the second weekend, because I got married May 9th, which was a weekend — that was when all the camps were going to go on for the second week. I was like, please, please be the first weekend so I can go and be free the second weekend. The week of my wedding, we're talking about, "Dang, do we not get married? Have the wedding but not the wedding?" We already paid for everything. I was like, what do we do? I talked to the 49ers and they were like, "No, like, have your wedding. You can come out after that." I was like, "Are y'all sure? Like, I don't want to miss the first ever thing." And I'm missing it. But me and Rivers had to fly out the very next morning after our wedding. Right to work. Flew out to California by ourselves. That's a whole story.
Philip Short: That's a whole story. Especially, like you said, the draft night — the unexpected, the unknown. And then there you see God show up in the middle of that, kind of right when you felt like hope had dwindled out. God showed up right on time. And then y'all go out there on faith and fly out the next morning. That was a crazy two weeks.
Stone Blanton: It was a lot.
Philip Short: So you get there, you had a strong preseason — four turnovers, including the forced fumble. Walk us through what that stretch was like. We've seen you do it at South Carolina, we've seen you do it at Mississippi State — now you're at the highest level, the 49ers in the preseason. I remember looking on Instagram — "Stone Blanton, Stone Blanton, making plays." Looked like you had a lot of energy. Looked like you were just having fun with it, like you said earlier. Walk us through that stretch.
Stone Blanton: It was pretty wild. First day coming in, I flew in, had to do all my physicals and stuff. They had practiced that day. So I flew in, had to do my physicals in the morning. They had practice at like one o'clock. It's called phase three, which is where they go into full-on practice — just helmets, but they had installs, they had playbooks already given out. I was flying in, got my physicals done, and then immediately I had to go to the field. Everybody was already out there. Had to do a quick warm-up and then ran in. Ran straight to our linebacker group. Got Fred Warner there — the best linebacker in the league. He's gonna be a Hall of Famer. And he was like, "Stone Cold!" The first time, everybody else was like, "Dang, that's my name. That's pretty cool." I was like, what? But joining that group — they truly are the best in the world. The dudes they had on that team, every single one of them have been on a 53-man roster, which shows you the talent they bring in. To the turnover point — I gotta give credit to my coach at South Carolina, Coach White. He showed a clip my freshman year of Darius Leonard. He played for the Colts. He was really good at punching the ball out. Really, really good. You get good, and then you get really, really good. I would say it's him and Fred that are probably the two best people to punch the ball out. I watched so much of his film, trying to perfect the punch — the punch-out — because I knew that was another thing I could put on my tool belt. A lot of people can't do it. You work drills all the time — punch the ball, punch the ball — but when you get in a game setting, there's not a lot of people that can slow it down, get the right mechanic, and punch the ball out, punch through the ball, hit the ball. A lot of times you see just people throwing haymakers — there's no effort, no intent to get the ball out. But I watched so much film, Coach Trey Money cut up so many clips of people punching the ball out, I just studied it over and over. At Mississippi State, I had two recorded, but there were really like five or six that were right on the edge of being takeaways. They're not very common to do, especially with such intent. It really was a differentiator when I got to the league, and I was able to do that all the way through preseason. I only had one in a preseason game, but I had three other ones in preseason — and I was also getting one-fifth of the reps everybody else was getting, just because I was an undrafted guy at the bottom of the depth chart. You do not get a lot of reps.
Philip Short: So you've gotta make every opportunity count.
Stone Blanton: Every opportunity count. There was a day where I had like three reps and I had a TFL, a big hit, and a forced fumble at the goal line. I got to break down the team, because it was our last padded practice. The running back caught it in the flat, he was about to score, and I ran and punched the ball out — our corner picked it up, scoop and score. I got to break the team down. I'd never seen that good before. The GM coming up to me being like, "Who punched the ball out? Who punched the ball out?" "All right, Stone's gonna break the team down."
Philip Short: Oh, man, that's awesome. That was a core memory.
Stone Blanton: Just being up there and having that ability. Yeah.
Philip Short: That's awesome. We talked about Mississippi State, and the 49ers — you get there, literally right to work when you get off the plane, and start producing. And then, even after that production, you ended up getting released from the 49ers. Emotions are everywhere, emotions are high. How do you process a cut like that, and what did you take from that experience?
Stone Blanton: I took a lot from it, honestly. The NFL is such a business. The people are great — the coaching staff, they really do care. Our linebacker coach, Coach Holland, KJ Wright — he played at Mississippi State, he was in our linebacker room helping coach. They really care about you and want the best for you. But at the end of the day, it's a business. So I was getting told that I was going to be on practice squad, I was going to get signed back, all this stuff — kind of leading up to it, because I didn't get to play the third preseason game. I tweaked my hamstring in the second one, and they put me on a 10-day protocol so they wouldn't let me play. I was like, I've played through a lot worse, trust me, I can play through this — and they wouldn't let me do it. So that made me super nervous, anxious. And then it's cut day — you take 90 people and you turn into a 53-man roster. Another thing people don't realize is, not all 53 dress out for one. And then two, if people are hurt but they're not hurt enough to be on IR — IR, you have a four-week window where you have to be out — so they're hurt, but not that hurt, they take up a spot on the roster. So they can't play the first couple games. So they've got to have another person in to play those first couple games, so they cut another guy. We were supposed to have six linebackers on the roster, and ended up only going out with five. So that messed up our room and our count. And I got left out of it. It is what it is. I understand it, enjoyed my time. But it teaches you a lot — you've got to just enjoy what you have in the moment. Don't ever leave anything. Because it's literally gone in an instant. And you're back home and you have no idea if you're going to get picked back up again. You thought your film was good enough, but nobody's calling you. You try to overthink things: "Gosh, I wish I would have done this, I wish I would have done that." And I was like, no, let it go. You did what you could, you played as hard as you could, and sometimes it doesn't go your way. But you've got to keep moving. I couldn't go home and just soak in it, because I know I have to stay ready to be on call, pretty much. That's what I did — you've got to flush it. That's one of the things I've always been really good at: flushing the negative things that affect my life, flushing it, moving on. Don't blame, don't complain. No BCDs.
Philip Short: BCDs, man — that was our MRA slogan. Blame, Complain, Defend.
Stone Blanton: It's so true though. All that stuff is like — it got down to the marrow — these great teaching moments that I look back on. I'm like, dang. Some of that stuff I thought was kind of cheesy — that stuff's actually pretty legit. Buy into it. That stuff's real. Because if you do blame, complain, defend, it can mess up your whole mindset. It can mess up your chances. Then when you get back, you're like, "Man, like, screw you all. You cut me, all this stuff." It should be, "Man, thank you. Thank you for signing me back. I'm glad to be here." Next week, cut me again. Appreciate the week ahead. You know, got to see a real game. They get signed back, they get cut again. My final time getting cut by the 49ers — I had made it through. They usually cut on Mondays. That's kind of when guys are always able to get cut. I made it through Monday. I was like, I'm good, I made another week, I got another week. They won't cut me theoretically. I mean, they can still cut you, but they probably won't. So it's Tuesday. We go through all the meetings, had lunch, breakfast, whatever. I'm like, all right, I'm going to get ready for practice. Got my stretching in, got tubs in. I was already putting on my clothes for practice, putting on my cleats, got spatted, had all the tape on. And I get a tap on my shoulder, and it's the guy that had walked me up to get cut every other time. I was like, no. And the way I knew is, I was filtering through my locker — I didn't see my jersey. I was like, what? Where's my jersey at? And as soon as I connected the dots, I was like, where's my jersey? And then I got a tap on my shoulder. I was like, oh, no. So you know, he brought me up there in my cleats, spats — walk of shame through the locker room, everybody's getting ready to go to practice. My coaches didn't even know. It was the day before Thanksgiving — I was supposed to go to Thanksgiving dinner with my coach. It just didn't work out. They had already, by the time I'd got my stuff together and left, they had already brought a guy in. That's kind of the revolving door of the NFL. You've got to take every single moment — not for granted. In college, you're pretty much safe for the most part during the season. You're on scholarship, you get it. They can cut you, but that won't happen until later. The NFL makes you think — those days when you're tired and you don't feel like doing anything, there's 90 other dudes hungry as hell to be on that field. You've got to be able to go the extra mile, be unhealthy, all that stuff. There's a lot more pressure on nutrition, recovery. Fred Warner was one of the greatest — up until this year, he had never gotten hurt pretty much. Big injury this past year. I kind of thought going into it, I didn't know — Fred Warner, who? I watched his stuff religiously, because he was kind of one of the other guys I studied for punching the ball. But he moved so different, and I was like, godly — how does he stay healthy? Then I got up there and got a close-up view of what he does every day. He does some crazy stuff. He works like nobody else and puts in extra work. The recovery he does is insane. Spends a lot of money on his body just to stay healthy all the time. That's a big piece.
Philip Short: I want to hit on the piece you were talking about — how all the habits you learned early on prepared you for the moment, getting cut, understanding how to digest that. It feels paramount. We go through so many things in life early on, we don't know that those events are going to shape our future or help us deal with things we may face later. I love how you put that — even when you referenced your coach from South Carolina punching the ball out, I feel like it was just a steady flow.
Stone Blanton: I didn't know that that one clip he showed was like a YouTube video. I didn't know that was two years before, three years before any of the payoff happened. My freshman year I was sitting there watching that, like, I didn't know I was going to be a starter. I'm just watching. I'm like, that's different. That can be something I can do. Because in high school, I didn't have that ability to punch the ball — I wish I did, because that's great. But I needed something to be different. I needed to differentiate myself from other people, because my physical attributes weren't something daunting — I'm not some crazy gifted dude. But a lot of stuff has been just training. And MRA set up a great foundation for all that.
Philip Short: I love how you said that. And then you hit on the point: be where your feet are. I think that is powerful. Especially nowadays, you see kids with the recruiting process wondering, "Will I get this offer or not," not even truly enjoying high school football anymore, because he's always thinking about, "What's the next camp? What's the next seven-on-seven? What's the next offer?" Then you look up, "Wait, I'm a senior. High school football is over." I don't know about you, but high school football is the most fun experience in the world. Besides any other level — high school football is the most fun. And so many athletes nowadays miss that experience because they're thinking about what's next.
Stone Blanton: Especially with NIL going on now. They think — and it's true — if you get those stars under your name, it equates to real dollars now. But if you're always chasing that, are you really going to get better? Or are you just chasing the money? Money's great. But football is a very limited time of your life. You can chase money outside of football. But once football is done, there is no going back. You can't go back and play football. You can't go back and have those relationships with your high school friends. You really need to enjoy that. So you've gotta be where your feet are. Because it's so important when you look back — you want to have… like, I love the fact that I can look back, and even though I transferred to South Carolina, I'm still able to text those coaches, ask them how they're doing. They'll ask me how I'm doing, keep up with my journey. Because I was always pretty present and intentional on making those relationships matter and count. Because I knew they were fleeting moments. They weren't going to be there forever.
Philip Short: I think that's so powerful, and a lot of people miss that. Especially with how fast today's world moves — social media, Instagram, everything. Everybody thinks somebody else is doing better than them, just with the way they show up on Instagram.
Stone Blanton: Don't worry about them. There's always going to be something better. So just go work, go be you. No one's going to be better at being you than you. There are a lot of things you can look into.
Philip Short: 100% agree with that, man. That was a great point. So obviously we're here now at Mississippi Speed Instruction, where we value speed and explosiveness and training up the young generation, ages primarily seven to 15, 16, even 18. From a linebacker's perspective, what role do you think speed and explosiveness actually play in everything you've accomplished?
Stone Blanton: Yeah, man, it's everything. For linebackers, it's not a whole lot of straight speed — like, long distance, running 100 yards straight as fast as you can. It's not as important for a linebacker, but the explosiveness, the start, the form, the technique, the shuffling, the 5-10-5s — all that stuff is crucial. A lot of the stuff when I was doing the camp with y'all, as a coach when I was home — a lot of it y'all are already doing. Y'all made it fun, but there was also actual value in what they were doing on the field. I was like, this stuff is actually pretty good. I can use some of this — maybe I need to add this. This makes it fun, but they're also getting really good work in change of direction. Y'all had a vision drill where they were catching the ball, running, stopping, catching the ball — a reaction drill. I was like, whoa, that's the next level. But the kids were loving it. They were eating it up. And I was like, this is special. People need this. Kids need this. Because it's training them for not just football, not just linebacker, but everything. Just being more athletic is going to make you better at other sports. That's what y'all do — make them more athletic, train their body to move like that.
Philip Short: I agree with what you said. Even just thinking about it right now — let's say a shooter. You could be the best shooter, but if you're not creating separation, if you're not getting open on the court, how are you going to get your shot up? That's a real question. How do you get the shot up to even show everybody you're a great shooter? Some people just stand there and shoot over and over, but you've got to practice the ability to create space — the change of direction, the explosiveness, like Josh Hubbard. He's one of the most explosive dudes, but he's not very tall. How does he get over people? He's explosive, fast, quick. He can change direction. He's able to create all that space and be dominant as the undersized guy. He's one of the best guards in the country.
Stone Blanton: In the nation. He could have been NFL, man.
Philip Short: He could have.
Stone Blanton: He's different. His explosiveness is different. We went to school with him. We watched him grow — he played ninth grade or sophomore football, played in one game, I think it was either my junior or senior year. He had like one touch, and I touchdown. I was like, dang, this is a little bit different. That was kind of before he had blown up in basketball. I think it was his eighth-grade year, kind of before he played up and went crazy. I was like, this dude's special. Then he stopped playing football. I was like, no — but he obviously has done amazing stuff.
Philip Short: That was his path.
Stone Blanton: Yeah. He could have done both.
Philip Short: Last one. When a kid in Madison watches this episode, they're sitting on the fence about whether they can really do this thing — what do you want them to walk away with after watching?
Stone Blanton: That's good. I'm going to try to put myself in my headspace when I was in sixth grade. I think we've talked about speed and development, agility — but the mental side, where I was at in sixth, seventh, eighth grade, that age group, because that's kind of when I started competitive sports. Not just travel ball, which is very important. But if I had to go back, it's just being bought into really enjoying what you're doing. Waking up early was a big thing in my early days. It still is today — it's one of those habits that stayed with me. Because that's when I think you're the sharpest, in the morning. So being able to train in the morning — getting yourself up. Because you feel great. Especially for men — that's when our testosterone levels are at the highest. So once you get over that initial, "Oh, I feel like crap" — because when I was in that age, I was waking up in the morning and driving on my golf cart to the Country Club of Jackson, where they had a gym. I was working out over there in sixth, seventh, eighth grade before I could drive. That stuff set a foundation of my work ethic to come — doing stuff like that at a very young age, and doing it in the morning, creating that discipline of, "I can do this." Because in the afternoon, you've got athletics and other sport responsibilities. But for the younger generation, it's just: don't specialize. Enjoy what you're doing and make everything intentional. And then enjoy every moment that you're going through stuff like this — and the camps y'all do. Having a lot of people, like, it creates relationships too, the kids being around each other. It's a big piece, because y'all don't just do MRA kids. Y'all do kids from all over. I remember kids from earlier years in travel ball — I look up and they're playing in college. I see them now and they're playing in the MLB, they're playing in college. I had those relationships because of camps like the ones y'all do. So that'd be another one: take your friends and hang out with people who have similar goals to you, because that's going to help you get to your goals. You can always be better with someone doing it beside you. So picking your friends — I know at a young age, like 12 years old, you may not think that matters, but that's honestly when a lot of friendships matter the most. Because that's when you're setting up who you're going to be. Even at such a young age as sixth grade.
Philip Short: What age is sixth grade?
Stone Blanton: I guess 12. I'm awful at this. That may be completely right.
Philip Short: I think about 12.
Stone Blanton: Sixth grade is when you can make those friendships that you're going to have for middle school and high school. And that's going to ultimately show you what your college career is going to be like. You can look back on the guys that were in sixth grade and were kind of the bad kids, quote-unquote — you look at them in college, they're still hanging around the same people. It's like a network. So picking those friends early — if you really want to go to the SEC, to the next level, to college — your friends are going to matter a lot more than you think, because they're going to help you along the journey, working out with you, encouraging you. Once you find a friend that really wants the best for you, that's a true friend. Not somebody who's pretending to be your friend, but as soon as you're successful, gets a little jealous. So I think that's a huge thing. But it all goes back to having fun, just enjoying being present.
Philip Short: You mentioned some great points, man — especially about establishing relationships and getting started early. Like you said, you drove your golf cart to the Country Club to get a workout in. You think, "Man, it's still early, it doesn't matter." But you're literally getting an edge. Which is why you played varsity football in eighth grade. Right? You played in eighth grade?
Stone Blanton: Yeah.
Philip Short: And it was because of those early habits you built that gave you an edge. I was all about, as a player, getting an edge — get an edge on my opponent. I feel like here at Mississippi Speed Instruction, with the camps that we offer, and the relationships you get to build with other kids, is the perfect edge for kids at an early age. I agree 100%. If you want your son or daughter to start building a real athletic foundation, come to an MSI Speed camp. We run a boys camp and a girls camp. The boys camp is June 9th through the 11th at Madison Ridgeland Academy from 4:00 to 5:45. The girls camp is June 23rd through the 25th at the same location, same time. Ages 7 to 14. Everything you need is at MississippiSpeed.com. The site is new and improved — click through and you'll find all the camp information for this summer. Stone — this was outstanding, man. Thank you for coming home and sharing all of this with us. And for any kid in Mississippi watching, any parent — I hope this conversation really lights something up inside of you. And, as an athlete, take a deep dive on what you value, and what are the different things you need to be doing right now to build a better future. I'm Coach Philip Short. This is the Mississippi Speed Instruction Podcast — and we'll see you next time.
