Philip Short: Welcome to the Mississippi Speed Instruction Podcast. I'm Coach Philip Short and today I'm sitting down with the head coach who's built one of the fastest rising programs in the state, and who just so happens to have trained under MSI himself long before he ever led a team. My guest today is Coach Craig Bowman, head football coach at Hartfield Academy in Flowood, Mississippi, entering his seventh season leading the Hawks. Under Craig, Hartfield has won back-to-back state championships in 2023 and 2024. And this is actually his second head coaching job, after leading Canton Academy in 2017 and 2018. He's a native of Montgomery, Alabama and a graduate of St. James School, where his father coached him in youth sports before later becoming a school principal. Craig played free safety at Millsaps, where he met his wife Claire, a volleyball player, and where he trained under MSI's own Mike Frascogna as a player. He later served as an assistant instructor at MSI's summer camps and even worked in the Speed City warehouse building training equipment that shipped to pro teams and major colleges across the country. Craig, welcome, man.
Craig Bowman: Man, glad to be here. Thanks, Philip.
Philip Short: Yes, sir. Man, seven years, back-to-back state titles, man. Heck of a run. Heck of a run.
Craig Bowman: It's been a lot of fun. Yes, sir. You know, hopefully we do some more things, do some special things, but it's been a good run.
Philip Short: No doubt. It's been awesome to watch, man. It's been awesome to watch. So Craig, let's start with right now, right? You're entering your seventh season at Hartfield, right? And you've won back-to-back state titles in 2023 and 2024, as we talked about, right? And this is actually your second actual head coaching job, right? What does that build at Hartfield actually look like? And did you expect it to happen so fast, or did you expect it to happen this fast?
Craig Bowman: Yeah, I mean, uh, so kind of a funny quick story. Yeah, I came to Hartfield in 2019. Um, and I came on as a coordinator. And then, uh, six days before the 2020 season — we're, you know, we're going into the COVID season — but six days before the season started, before we started practice, I get named head coach. Uh, the head coach wanted to just be a defensive coordinator, and I moved in. And the biggest thing that we needed was a culture shift. Um, I mean, almost a completely 180 degree turn. Um, and on top of that, Hartfield is a young school. We're celebrating 15 years of the school being open. Uh, so we are a teenager when it comes to schools, especially in this area. And so, um, man, I really didn't — and you think you have a five-year, ten-year plan and things like that, but you always feel like you're building towards a championship, and when you show up in them as early as we did, it is a little bit of a shock to the system.
Philip Short: No doubt. And it creates some pretty, uh, high expectations early on in your career, uh, that, you know, you got to continue to try and live up to. Man, like I said, just watching — it's been awesome watching you run that program. Like I said, flipped it around. You know, I played, uh, in the MAIS from 2018 to 2020, right? And Hartfield, you know, Hartfield was — they were solid, but nowhere near where they are now. I think that's just a testament to you and the culture that you built. Not only you, but the coaches that you brought in, uh, some players, some really, really good players along the way, man. I'm just, like I said, just watching from my point of view, just an awesome, awesome job of the culture that you brought in and how you turned it around so fast. Back-to-back state championships right in the league, and you know our league, it's — I mean, one of the best leagues in the state. That's my opinion on it, but I think it's one of the best leagues in the state. And for you to do that in such a quick period of time, I think that's just a testament to the culture that you brought in, just you as a great coach, man.
Craig Bowman: Well, I appreciate that. And Philip, you were a heck of a player. We had to deal with you for several years and that brought a lot of challenges, and coached against some really good teams at MRA. And that's the thing — I think trying to have a seat at the table. I mean, when you're talking about the teams and the history of MRA and, uh, the Jackson Preps and JA, and here we are an up-and-comer school. Um, that was one of my goals when I took over as head coach. I knew that that transition into this league was happening, and we just wanted a place at the table. And, uh, so it really started, um, not even that first season. We had a really good first season in 5A in 2020, lost in the quarterfinals, but really my culture and the culture that I was trying to bring after learning what I learned at Canton being a head coach — I made a ton of mistakes — um, was really starting in January of 2021, with a weight program and a speed program and, uh, trying to find any kind of edge in our league, because our games are razor thin. You know it, Philip.
Philip Short: Oh, yeah.
Craig Bowman: Uh, I mean, one possession could change not just that game, but really the trajectory of your season. And so we really had to change a mindset — from how we work in the weight room, how we condition outside, and how we approach the game mentally.
Philip Short: Awesome, man. That's awesome. Man, so take us back further, right? You're originally from Montgomery, Alabama and went to St. James School. Your dad coached you in youth sports growing up, right? And you know, he became — he was a school principal as well, right? So what did you pick up from your father early on, and what do you now run at Hartfield that you can trace straight back to him?
Craig Bowman: Yeah. So, uh, my dad was my coach growing up. He was a high school coach, uh, for many, many years. With my — I have older brothers, and, uh, so he was actually a high school coach and did not coach them as much as he coached me. Um, it was a blessing. Now, looking back, I'm grateful for those times, and I'm actually about to coach my son. So I think about those times that my dad had with me. But I think the one thing my dad — his level of consistency and detail was unmatched. I mean, even in youth football, uh, he was one of those old school coaches. You weren't going to move on until you ran that play perfect, or to his standard, and you would do the same thing over and over and over and over again. And then, you know, dad did not have that switch when we got in the car to go from coach to dad. He kind of was always coach, and in the car he made sure to let me know the things I did not do well, and yeah, at the dinner table he reminded me of the things I didn't do well. But he brought a level of consistency, and that's who my dad is just as a person. He is a consistent human. I knew exactly who I was getting every day as a father, and he brought that to the field. And I think, um, you know, I think there's a level of — you have to be great in the boredom as a coach. Uh, I think there's a level of coaching, and, you know, as a quarterback, you know, repetition matters, and new plays are fun and exciting, but if you can't execute your base plays or what our day one install is, uh, you're not going to be very, very good. And so just that, um, being able to as a coach sit in the boredom and consistently attack, you know, that boredom of a day one install, the plays we should know by the back of our hand.
Philip Short: Yeah.
Craig Bowman: Doing it day in and day out. And so that was something I took away from my dad, and I kind of see that in myself. I can hear him — do it again, do it again, do it again. And I do that a lot also.
Philip Short: Wow. That's — I love that piece. I want to stay right there as far as that consistency piece, because I think that's a big thing, uh, you know, as a coach, and you know, with me being a player on the player side, right? Wanting a consistent coach, and then being a coach, right? Want the kids to understand, hey, this is what you're going to get from Coach Short day in and day out. Two, same thing. We're doing offensive installs, right? Consistent. And hey, quarterbacks, this is our read, this is our process. Boom, boom, boom. And not, like you said, adding how can I add new plays and new plays, new plays — but like, how can we master what we already have, right? How can we, you know, like you said about the boredom. I love what you said about the boredom, right? It feels boring, right? It might feel that way, but it's consistent, right? It's something that you're doing day in and day out. Once you get that day one install, then you start to add on, add on, add on. So I like how you kind of made that comparison, that analogy, with your dad being consistent as well as your coaching technique. I think that's huge for the kids.
Craig Bowman: Yeah. And you want to know what you're showing up to. And, uh, our coaches are super consistent. And you know, I think one thing we try and teach our guys is what's boring on Monday is super exciting on Friday. You know, uh, if inside zone is our bread and butter play, the kids get tired of it. Monday, you know, rep it Monday — team, individual, and all that. Tuesday, repeat. Wednesday, repeat. Thursday you go through a script and all that. And then Friday, when you bust, you know, a big play for 40, 45 yards, that boring play is super exciting to fans. And so there has to be a payoff with these kids.
Philip Short: No doubt.
Craig Bowman: And so getting them to kind of understand and work with that tension is probably the most challenging thing I think we do as coaches.
Philip Short: No doubt. No doubt. No doubt. No, I 100% agree, because as coaches, you know, that's one thing we're trying to always look for — the next, what's the next, what's the next? But like I said, being a high school athlete and then being a coach, understanding that, you know, once we leave practice, we ain't just thinking about football all day long. You know what I'm saying? Like, we're thinking about other things. We're still being a kid. You know, you got class, you got other things. And so I feel like what makes a great coach, which is what you're saying, is how simple can I be? How many times can I rep it until the kids can't mess it up?
Craig Bowman: That's right.
Philip Short: Right? Not just get it, but get it to a point they can't mess it up. Right? They're doing — if it's inside zone, they're doing inside zone in their sleep. Right? We're throwing hitches, quick game. We're doing that in our sleep because we've done it so much. We've repped it so much. So I love how you talked about that consistency, because I think that's really key for a coach — not only for how you coach, but also as far as just being a coach, your characteristics, being consistent, knowing what the kids are going to get from you day in, day out. I think that's huge, man. So, you went on to play free safety at Millsaps College, right? And that's also where you met your wife Claire, right? Who played volleyball there. You both graduated in 2002 and you've been married for 19 years now, right? Tell us about the Millsaps years and how you two met.
Craig Bowman: Yeah. So, uh, I actually went to Samford out of high school, and I went on a visit at Millsaps and loved the visit. Um, and, uh, ultimately Samford wasn't the place for me, and I was just going to go to the University of Alabama in state, and, uh, I knew I wanted to be a coach, Philip. I knew in junior high school I wanted to be a coach.
Philip Short: Wow.
Craig Bowman: And so, uh, I was going to go and hopefully work with the football team. And my dad reminded me, hey, you had a really fun time at Millsaps. Really good visit. Why don't you go give it a try? The University of Alabama will always be there. And so I did, and, uh, man, had four great years of playing Division 3 football. It was a lot of fun. Learned a lot. Played under some really famous Mississippi coaches. Um, met the Frascogna family. Um, but also met my wife. She played volleyball. The first time I saw my wife was in the athletic training room. She was actually dating another guy on the football team. That's another story for another day. Um, and we were in education classes together, and, uh, so it was towards the end of our, um, junior year that we kind of started dating and things like that. And, uh, I think about seven years later we get married, and 19 years later, here we are.
Philip Short: Here we are still. That's right. I love it, man. I love it, man. So here's something I think a lot of people watching won't know, right? And so while you were at Millsaps, you actually trained under Mike Frascogna at MSI. So you experienced MSI speed training firsthand as a player, long before any of this that you see right now is even here. And so I guess I ask, like, what was that like? And is there anything from that training that you still use today?
Craig Bowman: Yeah. So Mike and MSI introduced — I just assumed, I mean, late 90s is when, uh, bigger, faster, stronger was really, really popular in high schools. Um, and I mean, to get faster you just ran, you know. I mean, there was no secret ingredient. There were no secret ingredients. There was nobody working on running form. There was nothing like that. And, uh, so I come to Millsaps and I actually played with Mike's little brother, Marty. And, uh, Millsaps wasn't real serious about football my first year there, and, uh, through some, um, really important men, and some men that really cared deeply about the Millsaps history and their history of football and where we were that year — uh, Mike and MSI got heavily involved in our offseason training.
Philip Short: Wow.
Craig Bowman: And it was a complete shock to the system. All the different — from the Quick Foot Ladder to the Side Winder to the Rocket Rope, to all these tools. And, uh, I mean, just to Mike having side conversations with me about my arms, about tension in my face and my neck — I mean, all these details I never even thought about, uh, all of a sudden kind of came to life. And I wasn't — I mean, I wasn't super fast, but I also wasn't really slow.
Philip Short: Yeah.
Craig Bowman: But I mean, it made a tremendous amount of difference in the game. I mean, from the field to the game. That's what you're looking for, right?
Philip Short: Translation.
Craig Bowman: It's translation. When we're doing drills, when we're talking about drills and coaches are like, "Hey, this is a new drill" — how does it translate to the game? And I mean, you know, we were joking before about speed kills. It does. And if you can gain just a tiny edge, uh, it was important to me. And, uh, I mean, I can remember as a college athlete thinking my arms were a problem. I remember that. And I remember thinking about it constantly. Even as I'm running through practice and walkthroughs, anytime I was running, I'm thinking about the little coaching cues that Mike would give us and his team would give us. And I bought into it wholeheartedly. I mean, I was all in on it. And, uh, it was a lot of fun, because the drills are fun and you're doing it with your teammates, and you know, training is a lot of fun, because you're getting in shape. You don't know you're getting in shape. I mean, there's all those little things.
Philip Short: Yes.
Craig Bowman: But it made a huge impact. I mean, to the things that we do today. I take little coaching points that I heard back then, and I've probably forgotten a lot of them, but I mean, speed is super important. If you're not thinking about it — I tell our kids all the time, if you're not thinking about it, you're not getting faster.
Philip Short: That's what I was just about to hit on, that point, like being intentional. Sounds like me. You were intentional, right? Because speed is very intentional. Very, very, very intentional. That's one thing I try to tell the kids, you know, that we work with here at MSI. It's like, if you're not thinking about it — hey, I want to stay on a 45 degree lean, keep my hips through, drive my knees up, like you said, arm pump. I don't want to go side to side. I want to drive my elbows back. Like, if you're not thinking about that and repping it out so much where you really don't have to think about it, right, then you're not being intentional on the small details, because it's super intentional. Other than that, you're just running around.
Craig Bowman: That's correct.
Philip Short: Right. Other than being intentional on the details. So that's that. I love that you said that. And even — I mean, I didn't know that MSI trained the whole Millsaps team.
Craig Bowman: Yeah. Trained us. I mean, they did a whole offseason one year. Um, and then in the summers — the guys that stayed up there, they would train us up at the school.
Philip Short: At the school. Oh yeah. Oh wow. Wow.
Craig Bowman: That was awesome.
Philip Short: That's awesome. And so you didn't stop at training under MSI, right? You went on to serve as an assistant instructor at MSI summer camps for the younger kids, right? The same camps that we run today. And so I guess I'd ask, what did teaching young athletes at those camps teach you?
Craig Bowman: Well, first off, I always love working camps because they would give us awesome shoes and t-shirts, man. And we were poor college kids, so we always took the gear. No, it — again, I knew I wanted to coach, and again, I fell in love with this side of it. Um, I've never been the guy that understands deeply about, you know, weight room things. I understand the importance of the weight room. I hire people that are experts in the weight room.
Philip Short: Yes.
Craig Bowman: Um, but the speed side is something that I always attached to. Um, because when I think as a player, when you can see results from hard work, there's a connection made. And I can remember when we first started, I started making these connections. So it was really easy for me to kind of fall in love with it a little bit and to want to do more. And, uh, so when they would run camps, it was just as fun to run the camps, because I mean, you know, when you know you want to teach and coach, you want to be around kids. And so just being able to, uh, have a platform to run drills and to speak with authority on something — the earlier you can do that, especially I think as a young coach, the better it prepares you, you know, down the road. Because, you know, I remember getting my first coaching job as a 22-year-old, and because I think I ran all of these camps, and you know, Mike would say, "Hey, you're in charge of Quick Foot Ladders. Here's the five or six drills. Here are the main coaching points." And then he was okay with you, you know, kind of making your own flavor.
Philip Short: That's right.
Craig Bowman: And so when I was getting ready to coach and run drills, I'd kind of already been through some of that with these camps. Um, and man, they were fun. Kids like them.
Philip Short: Oh, kids love them, man.
Craig Bowman: And, uh, I mean, I can remember running a real big one at Millsaps, man. And they're hot and they're long, but the kids just keep going and they want to do these drills, and it's kind of one of those things where you're getting better and don't know you're getting better. And that's just another added bonus.
Philip Short: Yes. A lot of competition. I want to second that, especially talking about, you know, how dealing with those big groups helps you individually as a coach. I can remember, you know, working the first speed camp, uh, Christmas speed camp — I think that was December of 25, or no, it might have been December of 24 actually. We held the first, you know, MSI Speed Camp, and I remember Mike saying like, "Hey, yeah, we're gonna put the number at 40." And I'm thinking, man, 40 kids, you know, that's a lot. And of course, we had four coaches, but I was one of the coaches, and you got about 10 kids per station. We'll do like rotation, like County Fair. And you're like, wait, I got to — you know, I have to learn, I got to talk to first graders, second graders, third graders, fourth graders, sixth — like, you know, you're dealing with all the kids from all age groups.
Craig Bowman: That's right.
Philip Short: It's like, you learn how to be in control, how to say what you mean, mean what you say, uh, how to handle groups. And I think that's paramount as a coach, right? Just understanding how to, um, you know, handle those groups in that group setting. So I love that you said that, because I definitely see that in my own personal life. Like, man, that's one benefit of the camps that you don't really even think about as a coach, as an instructor — learning how to build relationships with kids, learning coaching points that kids, hey, remember, right? Putting the information on their level where they remember. I think those are all hidden talents of great coaches, right? Being able to relate to the kids, to who you're training, and also being able to run big groups, being able to be in control in big group settings.
Craig Bowman: That's right. And kids spot phonies, man. And so when you're able to speak with authority on something and they buy into it, man, that's kind of its own drug, you know? It's a lot of fun.
Philip Short: Yes. No doubt. No doubt.
Craig Bowman: Yeah.
Philip Short: And here's another one I don't think many people know either, right? You actually worked in the warehouse at Speed City, building the training equipment that shipped out to the pro sports teams, you know, across North America and major colleges, right? And so what was that experience like, brother?
Craig Bowman: It was hot. It was hot. It was a warehouse in Pearl, Mississippi, right? So Mike and his team were in a building downtown kind of close to the King Edward. So, uh, man, it was hot. And we had grommet machines, we made the Quick Foot Ladder, we made everything.
Philip Short: Wow.
Craig Bowman: There's only a few things — I can't even remember them all, but there was a lady that, um, sewed non-stop, and then there were about three to four of us in the warehouse. And, uh, we made — I mean, we had this long table with a, uh, with like a hot pin looking thing that puts the holes in the Quick Foot Ladder ribbon, and then you'd put the, you know, the ladder pieces, the blue ladder pieces, the dowels, I think they were called. Uh, and you put the grommets. I mean, it was work, bro. Like, the people that used our equipment didn't appreciate the love and sweat equity that went into those Side Winders. We had these grommets. So, uh, I don't even know if y'all still use Side Winders. But like, we had rubber hose, and it was a cuff around both ankles, and then there was a rubber between to keep the tension. Had different strengths of tension.
Philip Short: Yeah, I know what you mean.
Craig Bowman: And you had to plug these grommets in, and you had to dip it in rubbing alcohol, and it was exhausting. It sounds really simple, Philip. Man, there was a lot of sweat equity that went in there, but it was fun. I mean, in the summers and really spring, uh, I would work in the warehouse until it was time — we worked out about 3:30 in the afternoon. So we'd get in there and pack boxes and build all this stuff and get it ready to ship out. And, uh, there were a couple guys in there, Keith Hilton and Kevin Wood. Kevin Wood's kids actually go to Hartfield. I see him all the time. Uh, and, uh, man, then I would leave and go train, you know, go to workouts and then go through speed training myself. I was around it all the time. All the time. I rarely got to go to the nice air-conditioned office, man. Mike kept us in the, uh, in the sweat shop, but it was hot, but it was fun. It was a lot of fun.
Philip Short: Man, that's awesome to just even know that all that equipment was being produced right here in Jackson, Mississippi.
Craig Bowman: All of it. Every bit of it was made and hand-sewn. Everything was hand-sewn, put together. I mean, looking back, it was wild. It was wild.
Philip Short: I mean, yeah. And to see MSI still here now, it's crazy — in 2026 and counting. I mean, it was around when you were there and you worked and you helped build some equipment. I think that's just a —
Craig Bowman: It was cool.
Philip Short: That's pretty cool.
Craig Bowman: Every once in a while, man, you walk into a school and you see a relic of Speed City — like whether it's, you know, you didn't build the, uh, the hurdles or anything, but they came, but we had to put stickers on all of them and stuff like that. And, uh, we had, uh, the big medicine balls that were filled with jelly. We actually filled them with jelly. Jelly.
Philip Short: Yep.
Craig Bowman: Uh, there may be some of us that got so hot we got in the big pit of jelly just because it was cool. Things happened. Man, like I said, the bosses were away. They didn't come very often. So we had some boredom we had to kill. But it was a good time.
Philip Short: Oh, that's a cool story. That's a cool story, man. So now let's get to that first head coaching job I mentioned. Yeah, you were actually the offensive coordinator at Canton Academy in 2016, the year Canton won a state championship, and then you were promoted to head coach for the 2017 and 2018 seasons. Walk us through that jump from coordinator to head coach.
Craig Bowman: It was rough. It was tough. Uh, I coached with Ron Jurney, who actually brought me to Millsaps and was a phenomenal high school coach, and we had a really good run in 15 and 16, and ultimately won it in 16. And then, uh, he stepped down. I didn't want him to.
Philip Short: Yeah.
Craig Bowman: I loved coaching with the guy. Um, but, uh, yeah, he named me head coach. And, uh, I'm thankful — um, one of the assistant coaches, a guy named Dennis Allen, he was the head coach at West Point. He kind of turned West Point High School around.
Philip Short: Oh wow.
Craig Bowman: And when I tell you, just tough, gritty kind of offensive line, defensive line coach — I mean, he is as old school as they come. And then I had another guy that coached up at South Panola. He was retired. But, uh, those two guys were the greatest resources I had, because they had been in my shoes, and so they spoke into me about things I needed to be doing, things I shouldn't be doing. They pointed out a lot of mistakes. It's a scary step. Stepping into that head coaching role is a scary step.
Philip Short: Everybody says they want it until they get in it. I love that. I think about that too from a quarterback perspective. Everybody's saying from the stands what the quarterback should have did, who you should — until you step in that role. So —
Craig Bowman: That's right, Philip. I have a thing I tell my quarterbacks — and I coach receivers now — but before he runs out there for the first game, I grab them. I've done it with Ethan. I've done it with Cayman Tapper, some of the guys, you know, Cruz Garner, all my quarterbacks. Before they take their first snap, before they run out there, I put my arm around them and say, "Just remember, it's me and you." Because there's two people they're going to blame. They're going to blame me, and they're going to blame you. We can score 75 points. We lose 76 to 75. You should have thrown one more touchdown.
Philip Short: Yeah.
Craig Bowman: It's always those two guys that that is on.
Philip Short: I'm gonna have to steal that one from you.
Craig Bowman: He's on the chopping block. It's me and you. But, uh, no, it was super, uh, tough stepping into your first role. I mean, because man, you're not just calling the plays, right? Being a coordinator and doing those things, you're focused on one thing. Well, now you're focused on everything. And, uh, you're trying to constantly navigate what pieces of the program need more of your attention. Uh, and Canton was small, but Canton had a tradition of winning, and they had an expectation of winning. And, uh, we jumped in a really hard division. We went up from 2A to 3A. We were the smallest school in 3A. And in the two years I was the head coach, uh, both teams in our district won a state championship. Heritage won it one year, Starkville won it the other. And so we were playing really good football teams. And, um, but it was tough. It was really tough. And it wasn't really till my second year, you kind of get your feet under you. And we won a game. We beat, uh, St. Joe at the end of the year. Um, and it's kind of one of those games you don't forget. We had no business even being in the game, and your kids kind of play on a whole different level. Uh, and that game kind of stuck with me. It's like, this is kind of why you do it. You forget really fast as a head coach why you do it, because you have to deal with parents, you have to deal with budgets, you have to deal with all these things. And so it takes those kind of moments to be like, man, this is really what it's about. So, uh, Canton Academy was an amazing training ground for me. The people were amazing. But there were definitely some tough nights.
Philip Short: Yes.
Craig Bowman: Yeah. Many, many tough days, many, many bad decisions and wrong choices that I was able to learn from and bring with me.
Philip Short: Man, that's awesome, man. That's awesome. Like I said, cool story. And now you're at the Hartfield Hawks, right? Been building the program from where it was to back-to-back state champions. You know, that doesn't happen by accident, right? And so I guess the question would be, you know, at Hartfield, what did you actually change? You know, talking about culture, maybe it's practice structure, standards, right, to get the Hawks to where they are now.
Craig Bowman: Yeah. So, um, I believe there was a culture of, um, when things got tough, we kind of folded up, right? Um, we had a big belief that, you know, we would make a decision on really when the schedule was released, who we were going to beat and who we weren't going to beat, right? And, uh, and man, I'm telling you, uh, I beat into them — I mean, beat into them — every play matters. You know, Nick Saban is the best to ever do it, and he would talk about that, that you have to treat every play as a life of its own.
Philip Short: Yeah.
Craig Bowman: Once that play's over, it's dead and gone. We got to move on to the next one. And so it was trying to bring our kids from looking at a schedule and seeing and circling teams like MRA and saying that's a loss. You know, circling teams like Simpson Academy back then, and League, and saying that's a loss, that's a loss, that's a loss — and trying to erase all those distractions and say, here's what we're going to focus on. We're going to focus on what we do for four to six seconds. We're going to get about a 30 second break, and we're going to do it again. We're going to do it again. And so I said for years — I don't say it as much anymore — I was like, the scoreboard takes care of itself. The scoreboard takes care of itself. If you stay locked in to these six seconds, forget the last one. We learn from it, we move on. We learn from it, we move on. And so that is kind of something that we started. And then it was our offseason program. I believed we had to try and build the hardest offseason program in the metro. And, uh, that was really without knowing what anybody else does. And so, um, we had to come up with something. And even my first year, because we had a very bad weight room culture, Philip. Um, kids would do a bench set and then go out — and we had a water fountain in our hallway, and they'd go get water and they'd walk around, and it drove me nuts. And so, uh, January of 2021, uh, we started a workout that, uh, it's called metabolics. It was introduced to me. Um, several coaches around the state actually got it from the same guy, and Jacob Lane's one of them. He knows all about metabolics. And so, uh, but, um, we actually would — I went to our head of school and I said, "I need you to understand something. I'm going to lock these doors. You can come in, but you don't have to unlock them." And I said, "I know fire hazards. I know codes. I hope nobody's watching that turns me in. I think the statute of limitations has gone up on it." But I would lock the doors. And so the first day they're like, "We can't get water." I'm like, "Nope."
Philip Short: And changing that mindset.
Craig Bowman: And we had to change the mindset. We had to change the mindset. And the whole weight room had no ventilation. I'm talking, the humidity in there was probably 130%. The walls would sweat, the weights would sweat. I mean, it was a dungeon. But it was what these guys needed. I mean, now we have a brand new weight room and it's nice, and it's like sometimes I miss that old weight room, because we literally locked the doors because we had to change how we thought about everything we did. There was nothing we left, you know, unturned, because 2021 we jumped into 6A.
Philip Short: Yeah.
Craig Bowman: You know, and, uh, had never played Prep before. The kids I coached had never played JA, but they had played MRA. And I mean, it took us several years, you know, in 6A to get over the MRA hump. But, uh, it was about changing the mindset. And, Philip, the consistency that I was talking about with my dad — I had to wake up every day ready to fight the fight, and my coaches had to be ready to fight the fight. There was never — if there was one statement we felt like was out of whack, we had to shut it down right then.
Philip Short: Wow.
Craig Bowman: I mean, there was no room for it, because I live with this fear that if I don't tell them the right thing, or we don't do it the right way, it's going to cost us when it matters most. And so I think — and when I say out of fear, it's just we're constantly thinking about what we're doing and how we can make it better. But it's like, man, if these kids — if I let one negative thing creep into their brain, it could set us back. How far back could it set us?
Philip Short: Yes.
Craig Bowman: And so even more at the beginning we had to do — and look, that first year, um, we ended up beating Prep twice, and, uh, beat them in the semifinal and ultimately played MRA. And I'm not — 10 out of 10 times we'd have lost to that MRA team. But I had no idea we would even make it there. And, uh, it's just a testament to kids buying into something you're selling, you know. But if you don't believe it and they don't see it — it's kind of like I was talking about with camps and stuff, when you start seeing things working, you buy in.
Philip Short: That's the point I was going to hit on, the results. It sounds like to me, once you see results — and you're a big fan of, like, once you see results, you buy in.
Craig Bowman: That's right.
Philip Short: And the results, that's the hardest part to get, right? People often hear that statement and like, all right, that's easy. But you know, you're forgetting the result. Once you see the results, that's the process — the results, seeing the results, doing, being intentional, doing things over and over, or, you say your coaches were even watching, hey, what do we say? Are we being negative? Are we even, you know — just all those small details, but being super intentional on the small details so that the kids can see results. And then once you see results, you wouldn't want to sit out and drink water at the water fountain while we're working out, now that I've seen results that this works. You know what I'm saying? So I kind of like that thought process.
Craig Bowman: Well, and the good thing that happened for me, Philip, is I hit it at the right time. I think timing is a lot of that. Um, uh, I think there's a Malcolm Gladwell book about that, that things kind of have to line up, um, with it too. And Hartfield wasn't used to winning. You see what I'm saying? I mean, they weren't used to winning. And we had people showing up for games, because we have a really cool atmosphere for home games. But like, people were showing up for games but they weren't paying attention. And so my whole thing is like, we're getting something to watch.
Philip Short: Yeah.
Craig Bowman: And so, uh, luckily once they kind of caught that taste, it started catching. You know what I'm saying? And different teams have different personalities, and yeah, we had a run of some really talented players, but the thing is, I don't believe they would have been as talented as they are if they didn't buy into what we were doing.
Philip Short: Mhm.
Craig Bowman: Um, they were good, but man, we were able to really push on them to do something really special. Uh, and so, Ricky Black — I had a conversation with him back when I was at Belhaven, and I just asked him, uh, I was like, "Coach, why are y'all so good? You know, why are y'all so good?" And he said, "You know, we have figured out a way to make D players C players, and C players B players, and B players A players, and we try and get as many of those D's and C's to B's as we can."
Philip Short: That's — it's a good point.
Craig Bowman: And it's just about player development. And so, you know, this stuff that you guys are doing, even though it's on the individual basis — those guys have to be the best possible version of themselves they can be on an individual basis, to affect a whole team and a whole program.
Philip Short: Yes.
Craig Bowman: So, uh, I think that's a lot of the things.
Philip Short: I love that point that you said too. I mean, even talking about, like, what Ricky Black said, talking about D to B — because first, because Jacob Lane, he still uses that quote to this day. Like, we'll have a team meeting in the morning with the offense, and he'll use the same exact quote of, like, look, we're not trying to take D players to A. We're just trying to maximize the best D players that we have, right? And if that's getting them to be B players, that's — as coaches, we've done our job. It's the same on the individual training standpoint too. Like, we don't — MSI, we don't promise the kid, hey, once you get on and train with us, you will be D1. We just promise that if you were a D player, hey, let's get you to a C, then I try to get you to a B, right? Whatever it is, right? And like you said, things aligning, right? Whatever God's will is for your life.
Craig Bowman: That's right.
Philip Short: Right? Because that's the person, I feel, has an aligned will and aligned destiny, right? Then we're gonna try to maximize the talent, maximize the abilities that God has given you. Now, is that turning you from a D to an A?
Craig Bowman: And that's a good job. That's right.
Philip Short: Or if it's from a D to a C, that's still progress, right? And that's what we love here at MSI. What we try to really hammer home, even on the individual level, is like, you come here, we train to see progress, to maximize all the abilities — running, jumping, changing direction, all the abilities that God has given you. So I think that was a great point.
Craig Bowman: Yeah. And I think, kind of to piggyback off that, Philip, is, you know, my job, I believe, is to make the best possible man I possibly can. You know, division one is division one. I think that's a result of a lot of factors. Um, I think my job — I tell the kids all the time, you're gonna be a man for a long time.
Philip Short: Yeah.
Craig Bowman: And then you're gonna be hopefully a husband, hopefully a father. And, uh, man, if we — we want to try and raise faith-filled men to positively affect, you know, their communities. And so I believe that these kind of things, like speed training and those camps — I mean, they were tough, and they build mental resilience and things like that. But I believe that's our job, right? There's nothing that makes me happier than when a guy calls me, or I get a wedding invitation, you know, or hey, I want you to meet my kids, and things like that, or, uh, you know, calls in saying I got baptized, or I found the Lord. I mean, these are all things that we — we just kind of drop nuggets as much as we can, and then what they do with them —
Philip Short: Yes.
Craig Bowman: You know, is between their relationship with the Lord and what they do with them and their side of the street. But that's the payoff in coaching, right? Uh, I say this all the time. I've got — in just six years we have two really nice trophies. We've got two really beautiful rings. Philip, they're in my office and they are covered in dust. Those do nothing for us right now.
Philip Short: Yes.
Craig Bowman: They did. For what we did today at practice and things like that, they did absolutely zero. It's what we can bring today. You know what I'm saying? Because what we've done in the past is great, and man, we can tell the stories and all that, and it's awesome — and what you guys did at MRA, and I can remember playing against and coaching against you, um, and coaching against that team, those are awesome. But it brings nothing to the table. We're not going to win a game this year based on those. Based on that, zero. So they got to come ready to go get to work and make themselves the best version of themselves they can.
Philip Short: Staying on the point of fatherhood — good point, right? You and Claire, y'all have two sons, Ben, who's 16, and Sam, who's 14, and both of them play football, basketball, soccer, and track, right? And so with both of you being former college athletes, how do you approach raising two multisport kids? Are you pushing them toward one sport, or protecting that multisport path, right, on purpose, you know?
Craig Bowman: Yeah. Um, this is a great question. I think this is a highly controversial question.
Philip Short: Very controversial.
Craig Bowman: Um, so here's my thing. As a coach and as a dad, uh, they get one shot at high school. I love my time at Millsaps. If I sit around with my buddies, I'm going to talk about high school football. Um, I'm gonna talk about high school basketball. I'm gonna talk — one of my favorite things is running high school track. That was awesome. Um, this is their only shot at it. I don't know what my kids are going to do. And so we are going to facilitate them being a part of whatever they can be a part of. Now, it has been easier since they're in seventh, eighth, and ninth grade. Uh, this year, my oldest, who's going to be in 10th grade, has had to make a decision about basketball or soccer, and he's gifted in both. Um, he's a very gifted soccer player. Um, but he's actually chosen basketball for this year. Um, and we just have the conversations with them. I do believe, um, multisport athletes are still — that's what I want as a coach. Uh, I want multisport athletes. Uh, I am not a proponent of the year-round athlete. I think we — here's a real controversial one. Uh, in the summers, you know, I think we can do too much with all the seven-on-seven. I mean, just from even a football standpoint.
Philip Short: Oh, yeah.
Craig Bowman: Uh, I know the coaches I coach against may fight me on this one. I believe there's just too much access. We can spend too much time with them.
Philip Short: Yes.
Craig Bowman: You know, I think there has to be a balance with kids being kids, kids being able to work on their own craft, but also kids changing with the season. So I'm a big multisport guy.
Philip Short: Okay.
Craig Bowman: But if I'm going to be a multisport guy, Philip, we have to facilitate ways that they can do that. We have to be okay with them missing a summer workout because they go to a basketball team camp.
Philip Short: Yes.
Craig Bowman: I can't make the kid feel bad for that. That is, you know — and my son's now on my football team, and you know, he went to — uh, our basketball team has a trip to Guatemala for a mission trip, but they play basketball for seven days, and he had team camps and it was cool and it's a great experience, but I have to be okay with him missing football too. So in order to be okay with multisport athletes, you have to be able and be willing to give up something.
Philip Short: Yes. You know, and that is true. That's true.
Craig Bowman: And so our standpoint — and I argue with my coaches about it, because my coaches don't all feel the same way, and I tell them all the time, soon as your name goes on that door, you can do it how you want. You know what I'm saying? But until then, this is our approach. We're not only going to allow it, we're going to help facilitate it.
Philip Short: So another safe space.
Craig Bowman: That's right. And another thing we do, Philip, that I think is super important, is our head coaches of these multisport — we communicate with each other and tell the kid where they need to be. We never put the kid in the middle, because that happens a lot too. I've been in programs where, you know, the basketball coach tells the kid you need to be at this, and I say no, you can't, as the football coach. Now the kid — and the kid's going to say yes sir to both of them. But instead, if I go to the kid and say, "Hey, man, you need to go to this basketball whatever," it relieves a lot of stress and anxiety.
Philip Short: Mm.
Craig Bowman: So I'm a big believer in multisport athletes. I think it makes the complete athlete. I think each sport teaches you different things.
Philip Short: Like, you got to change direction. You got straight line speed for some sports. Uh, some sports like soccer, big endurance sport, like you're running up and down that field, up and down that field, right? Whereas basketball is like short pace sprints, right? Short pace, back to back. And so I do believe in playing multi — that's one regret that I, you know, if I could take it back. Once again, you only get high school sports one time. So all I got is just, man, I was really good in basketball. I could have played baseball, but like, I didn't play it, you know, because I was so honed in on, hey, you know, I want to be a quarterback, quarterback. And it worked out, right? I had the ability to play division one football. But looking back on it though, I would have much rather tried to play all three sports, just because I mean, at that point I'm so dialed in on, man, I got to go, I got to make it D1. I got to play D1. Now you look back on it now, like you said, I'm a husband, coach, and it's like, man, I would have liked to run up and down that hardwood, like, you know, with my buddies, or I would have liked to play on that diamond with my buddies, especially, you know, I had the abilities to play it, but I was so stuck on that one sport — major in it, give it all you got. You know what I mean? So, looking back on it, I do think the multisport avenue is the way to go. Me personally, that's my opinion.
Craig Bowman: And it's hard.
Philip Short: Yeah, it is. Especially now with all the summer offseason training. Hard. Exactly. Right.
Craig Bowman: But you know, and our kids are banged up all the time. I feel like my oldest — but he's growing, and when they're growing and they're doing, he's always hurt and always something's nagging him. But we're going to — I love the fact that they play multiple sports, because also, man, as a dad, and you'll learn this one day, you like just watching your kids do something they love. There is something really, really enjoyable about just sitting up there, you know, trying not to scream at him, uh, trying not to be a coach, but try and be, you know — take the coach hat off and put the dad hat on and just sit there and be proud of your kid. And so, uh, it is nice to do that with other sports. This will be the first year I've coached — my kids come to practice every day with me, so we'll see how that goes.
Philip Short: Yeah.
Craig Bowman: But that's a lot of fun.
Philip Short: That's good. That's good, man. So Craig, last one. All right. All right. Last one. You've been an MSI training partner, right? An MSI camp instructor, a state champion head coach at two schools, and a dad raising two multisport athletes. If a parent watching this takes one thing away and applies it tomorrow, what would you want that to be?
Craig Bowman: Man, I think it is providing the opportunities for your kid to be the best version of themselves. Kind of what we're talking about. And, you know, I think opportunity is right here in Jackson, Mississippi. You don't always have to go three, four, five hours away and do all these things. Um, but man, I think let kids play the sports and do the things because they love it and they have fun, because they have a passion for it. And then, you know, if there are opportunities for them to improve themselves, absolutely take it. I think these guys that do camps like this, and trainers, are great, as long as it healthfully merges with what they're doing within their schools.
Philip Short: Right, man. Craig, thank you, man. Thank you. From training on MSI as a player, to teaching our camps, to building back-to-back state champions at Hartfield — this is exactly the kind of story that shows parents what's possible when training and great coaching come together. And so if you want your son or daughter to train with MSI, head to mississippispeed.com for our current speed camp schedule. Everything you need is on that site. I'm Coach Philip Short. This is the Mississippi Speed Instruction Podcast, and we'll see you next time.
